NASA SP-64

PROGRESS

IN

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE

DENSITOMETRY

A conference held in Washington, D. C., March 25-27, 1965, and sponsored by Nati_nal Aeronautics and Space Administration, National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases (NIH), and American Institute of Biological Sciences

Scientific and Technical Information Division

NATIONAL

AERONAUTICS

AND SPACE

1 9 66 ADMINISTRATION
lVashington, D.C.

OR GANIZERS

National

G. DONALD WHEDON

Institute

ot Arthritis

National Institutes

and Metabolic of Health

Diseases

National

DALE W. JENKrNs

Aeronautizs

and Space Adrn/inistration

EDITORS

G. DONALD WHEDON

WILLIAM F. NEUMANN '

University

ol Rochester

DALE W. JENKINS

FOR

SALE

BY THE

SUPERINTENDENT WASHINGTON,

OF DOCUMENTS,

U.S.

D.C.,

20402--PRICE

GOVERNMENT $1.50

PRINTING

OFFICE

Foreword

The effects of weightlessness and decreased activity on the astronaut's mnseuloskeletal system during prolonged space flight, missions are of concern to NASA. This problem was anticipated from the knowledge that human subjects lose significant quantities of calcium from the skeleton during periods of bodrest, immobilization, and water immersion.
An accurate method of measurement of the changes in mineral content of the

skeleton is required not only in the space program but also in the biological, medical, and dental fields for mineral metabolism studies and for studying various pathological conditions of the skeleton and teeth. This method is a difficult one requiring the coordinated efforts of physiologists, biophysicists, radiologists, and clinicians. The densitometry methods reported in this conference which have been used or are being developed include X-ray, beta excited X-rays, radioisotopes, sonic vibration, and neutron activation analysis Studies in the Gemini, Biosatellite, and Apollo flights use the X-ray bone

densitometry method which requires making X-rays before and after the flights. An in-flight method of bone densitometry would be valuable, and use of raAioisotope sources has been suggested.
Many advances in bone densitometry have been made in the last five years, and the urgency of the requirement makes this working conference timely and valuable. In such a rapidly developing field with investigators working independently in a variety of scientific disciplines, a working conference is of

great value in exchanging information and ideas, critically evaluating approaches and methods, and pointing out new research pathways.
This working conference was organized under the joint sponsorship of the National Institute of Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases of the National Institutes

of Health, the American Institute of Biological Sciences, and the National

Aeronautics and Space Administration.

These procc_ings are the written

record of the invited papers and informal discussion. The editors have deleted

much of the discussion involving clinical problems, bone pathology, and other areas not directly related to bone densitometry. Lengthy discussions on X-ray densitometry were deleted since the major controversies on linearization, analog transformation, and instrumentation problems were resolved. This working conference was of great value in making a critical evaluation of the present status of methods in bone densitometry and in stimulating further interest in this research area.
Daxa_ W. Jz_s

Ohief , Enviramr_ental Biology Office of Space Science and
Applications National Aeronautics and Space
Administration

m

Contents

Welcoming Remarks ....................................................

DaLE W. J_a_,cs and Jom,,T R. Oz.rvE.

lu L_ Ou u_l.luaa ...........................................................

G. DONMA_

WIng, DON.

PAGE
1

X-RAY DENSITOMETRY

Theoretical Aspects of Radiographic S. DAWD Rooóo_.

Densitometry

.........................

Quantitative Radiography HaRora_ _R.

of the Skeleton in Living Systems ...............

Measurement of Cortical Bone Volume and Lumbar Spine Density ...........

B. E. C. Nov.D_, E. Bam_ETT, D. A. SmT_, and J. ANDm_SON. Radiographic Bone Densitometry ........................................
PAu_ó_ BmmY MACK.

Factors Affecting the Precision of Radiographic Densitometry Spine and Femoral Neck .............................................. GEORO]_ P. VOSE.

of the Lumbar

Comparison of Cortical Thickness and Radiographic Microdensitometry

in

the Measurement of Bone Loss .........................................

STa_Ia_ M. GA_, ELISE FEUTZ, CUaXLm COLBERT,

and BETT_ WAONBR.

The Interrelationship

Between Bone Density and Cortical

Second Metacarpal as a Function of Age ................................

NavommN Wo_s_

and Ja_am EAoma.

Thickness

in the

f
7
/
11 /
21 /
31 Ę
/ 47 j"
/ 65 /
j,.' 79

OTHF_.R METHODS OF DENSITOMETRY

Bone Mineral Measurement by Improved Photon Absorption Technique ......

John R. C_RoN and Jam_s A. So_moN.

Quantitation of Bone Mineral Measurement in the Domestic Hen ...........

STEVEN W. Bxscocz and JuAN MoIvnLLA.
Precision Methods Using Soft Penetrating Radiation MarTIN J. COHEN and ALBERT J. GIz.soN.

for Bone Densitometry..

87 -_
95 j .... Ę
103

VI

CONTENTS

-

Iodine-125 Bone Densitometry ........................................... NEr_s M. STRANDJORD and LAWRENCEH. LANZL.
Design and Applications of fl-Excited X-ray Sources ....................... J. J. EzoP and T. G. S_NCHCOMB.
Sonic Measurement of Bone M_ss ........................................
CLAYTON RICH, ELI KLINK, RAY SMITH, BEN GRAHAM, and PETER IVANOVICH.

PAGE
115
127
137

APPLICATION OF TECHNIQUES IN HUMAN STUDIES

Rates of Involution of Vertebrae and Femur in Aging ...................... JAM_s S. ARNOLDand MURRAYH. BARTLEY.
The Application of Measurements of Bone Volume and Spinal Density ....... B. E. C. NORtoN, D. A. SMITH,J. MACGREGOR, and J. ANDERSON.
Estrogens and Postmenopausal Osteoporosis ............................... NELS M. STRANDJORDand LAWRENCEH. LANZL.
Calcium Loss Studies During Human Bed Rest: A Preliminary Report ........
PAULINE BEERY MACK.
Regression Curves for Representative Urinary Calcium and Bone Mass Values.
ELSA ARCINIEGAS KLAPPER and PAULINE BEERY MACK.
Normal "Osteoporotic" Bone Loss ....................................... STANLEYM. GARN, CHRISTABELG. ROHMANN, ELEANOR M. PAo, and
ETHEL I. HULL.
Comments on Cortical Thickness Measurements ...........................

RICHMOND

W. SMITH,

JR.

Concluding Remarks ....................................................

G. DONALD

_ZHEDON

and

DALE

W. JENKINS.

Participants ...........................................................

149 155 163 169 179
187 J
195 .j 201 "._,_i v': 103

a

Welcoming Remarks

DALE W. JE_s,

Conference Chairman

JoHN R. OLd, American Sciences

Institute of Biological

DR. ]ENKINS:

On behalf of the National Aeronautics

and

Space Administration,

I would like to welcome

the participants

to this Working Conference on

Progress in Development

of Methods in Bone

Densitometry. Dr. G. Donald

Whedon

and I have dis-

cussed the importance and the need of getting

research people together in this field to deter-

mine what progress has been made. There have

beau many developments in bone densitometry

using X-ray, radioisotopes, and sonic vibration.

We have asked the principal scientists in the

world working in this area to come together

with a critical group of knowledgeable ists in related fields.

special-

The field of calcium metabolism is so con-

troversial and difficult that a working conference of this type is quite necessary. When a

group of calcium specialists and densitometry

people get together, you get some controversy,

and occasionally a little excitement.

Now that

we have a critical group, maybe we will have a

critical mass, perhaps leading to an explosive advance.

The problem of bone densitometry in humans

and animals has existed for a long time, and it

has medical, dental, and public health impor-

tance. With the advent of the space age, it as-

sumes greater importance with regard to astro-

nauts under weightlessness

conditions.

Based

on results from bed rest, immobilization,

and

water immersion studies, it has been anticipated

that decalcification

in astronauts during long

periods of weightlessness problem.

will be a potential

Bone X-ray densitometry

experiments

are

scheduled on several of the Gemini flights to

determine any change in bone mineral content

of the astronauts. It is essential that the present

status of the improved X-ray measurement

method be fully understood and points of con-

troversy be impartially discussed. It is hoped

that this working conference can resolve some

of the questions and problems which have been

associated with the earlier attempts to use bone

X-ray densitometry.

The proceedings of this

conference will provide a timely reference and

critical evaluation of this method at the time

when the Gemini experiment abl_

data are avail-

The conference will be very informal, with

perhaps one rule that Dr. Frank Fremont-

Smith makes in his conferences, "Don't inter-

rupt me while I am interrupting

you."

This conference is being co-sponsored

by

NASA, by the National Institute of Arthritis

and Metabolic Diseases (of NIH), and by the

American

Institute

of Biological

Sciences

(AIBS).

DR. OLIVE:

I would like to add the welcome of the Amer-

ican Institute of Biological Sciences to those of the other co-sponsors.
This is just a brief word about where AIBS fits into this particular program, and its actual inception. We work closely with NASA on several projects, this being a typical example of
1

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

how we are able to help coordinate the scientists.

and assemble

Realizing that the interests of AIBS are quite broad in the biological medical sciences, it is not difficult, then, to see why we would be inter-

ested in co-sponsoring and working with a pro-

gram of this type. Our own charter is broad,

very broad actually, encompassing

all the bio-

logical sciences as well as the medical and agTicultural sciences.

We are an organization now of about 13,000

individuals,

with an affiliate membership

of

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

about 65,000, and accomplish many of the things

the Federation

(Federation

of American Soci-

eties for Experimental

Biology) does. We

have the same sort of active programs_ our own

annual meetings, and are interested in the edu-

cational side of the biological sciences.

Again, back to NASA for a moment. We

have several contracts with NASA on which

we are working actively for the furtherance of space sciences as we refer to it, because it includes the manned orbital laboratories and the

Biosciences Program of NASA.

ó*

Introduction

G. Do_

Wmwos

First of all, I want to indicate what should be obvious, the strong interest of the National In-

stitutes of Health and particularly

of my own

Institute, Arthritis and Metabolic Diseases, in

this subject. Increasing interest in the prob-

lem of bone densitometry has been apparent to

us at NIH as it is to everyone else, so that I

enjoyed participating

with Dale Jenkins in the

instigation of this conference.

I think that the Gemini and Mercury launch-

ings certainly point up the importance of devel-

oping the most efficient and accurate tool for

measuring changes in the density of the skele-

ton. Nevertheless, for all of our concern about

what is going to happen to the skeleton under

the condition of weightlessness, bone densitom-

etry has been a problem of great interest over

a long period of time to physiologists

and

clinicians with regard to the effects of various

factors on the skeleton, be they hormonal,

nutritional, or whatever.

Of course, one of the principal methods that

we have used for measuring skeletal changes

over some considerable period of time has been

the metabolic balance approach.

But, even

metabolic balance studies for calcium over sev-

eral weeks' time, or even several months' time,

give only a portion of the total biological situa-

tion. We need, obviously, some index, some

means of measuring very precisely the state of

mineralization

of various parts of the skeleton

from one point
many months, real accuracies.

in time to another, not only over but over many years, and with

The problems of bone densitometry,

I think,

have been long known to many scientists.

The

first papers on this subject appeared at least 30 to 40 years ago. Since that time, there have

been comments on the effects of the varying kilo-

voltage exposure of the films, quality and kind of films, and the very imporrtant problem of soft tissue interference, which itself varies a great

deal in its density from point to point across any particular bone. The matter of integration by scanning, then, has been of concern, and is a relatively recent development in this field.

An idea of the difficulty of the densitometry problem can be gained from the fact that there has been a tendency to measure those bones which are easiest to measure, with lack of full awareness of the different physiological significance of different bones. In other words, it is much easier to measure the thickness of cortical

bone, particularly if it is a very peripheral bone, and a small bone, because it is covered with the least amount of soft tissue. On the other hand,

as we are progressively becoming more and more aware, these peripheral bones may be far less re-

sponsive to changes in the total mineral content of the skeleton than trabecular bone, which is

usually located in spots which are least accessible

to accurate X-ray viewing.

The mobility or availability of the mineral in

trabecular bone, in apparent contrast to that in

cortical bone, may be indicated by two examples.

One is the graphic comparison by Vose (Vose

et al., 1961. Quantitative

Bone Strength Meas-

urements in Senile Osteoporosis.

J. Gerontol.,

vol. 16, p. 1'20) of a normal femur in cross section, showing the rather dense and convoluted trabecular structure within the cortex, with a similar cross section of a femur from an indi-

vidual of similar age with pronounced osteoporosis. There is a vast difference in trabecular content of these two bones, with much less difference, at least to the naked eye, with respect to thickness of cortex.

4

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

My other example is merely to remind you of

the experiment of Bauer (Bauer et al., 1929. A

Study of the Bone Trabeculae as a Readily

Available

Reserve Supply of Calcium.

J.

Exptl. Med, vol. 49_ p. 145). This demon-

strated rather graphically the reservoir capacity

of trabecular bone for making available the

shift of rather large amounts of calcium in and

out of the skeleton.

These investigators

gave

one group of adult cats a rather large calcium

intake over a period of weeks and months_ then

they removed one humerus.

This same group

was then shifted to a low calcium intake for a

similar period of time_ and finally the other

humerus was removed for comparison.

Abun-

dant trabecular bone was noted in the humerus

from the high calcium feeding period, and later in the same cat_ loss of considerable trabecular

structure on low calcium. To control the exper-

iment_ the investigators

took another group of

adult cats in which the reverse order of feeding

was used_ with low calcium intake first_ which

resulted in fewer and thinner trabeculae.

After

several weeks of high calcium intake, replace-

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

ment of trabecular structure in a significant

degree was noted. Similar studies were also con-

tinued by this group in other animals_ and at

different ages_ but I think the significant point

for us is the viability of trabecular animals.

bone in adult

In some respects_ this is the second workshop conference on methods of bone densitometry.

Stanley Garn organized a workshop which was

held at NIH in 1959. This one-day conference

resulted in a rather excellent bibliography which

has been very useful. Due to the considerable

interest and activity over the last few years_ we

felt that it was time to call together a confer-

ence which would try to come to grips with this

subject with greater vigor_ and spend more time

at it. This will be a working conferences in

which we expect to learn from each other.

We have purposely selected a group from

many different disciplines_ radiologists_ pathol-

ogists_ clinicians_ biophysicists;

and there are

several others_ including mathematicians_

who

are prepared to make comments on some of our

methodology from their point of view.

X-RAY DENSITOMETRY G. Do_._a_ WmmoN, Chairman

d

N'6-:76 7

Theoretical Aspects of Radiographic Densitometry

Quantitative

radiographic

densitometry

has

been one of the most thoroughly investigated

nondestructive

methods for the determination

of bone mineral in vivo. In evaluating this method, it is well for us to consider some of the

sources of systematic bias which may occur and are often overlooked.

The top of figure 1 shows a frequency dis-

tribution

curve of a typical heterogeneous

X-ray beam. The range of X-ray energies is

very wide, only a small portion being of the

peak energy.

If this X-ray beam strikes a piece of bone,

represented

by this figure, the heterogeneous

radiation is absorbed in a complex fashion.

That is, as the heterogeneous

beam passes

through the bone, not only is the total amount

of radiation changed but so is the frequency

distribution

of the remaining

photons, the

lower energy photons being absorbed to a

greater extent than the higher energy ones. It

would be convenient if X-ray beams were homo-

geneous, since their absorption would then fol-

low a more predictable pattern, and quantitation

would be greatly simplified.

But the produc-

tion of homogeneous

X-ray beams is difficult

and has not yet been developed useful level.

to a practical,

It is the usual practice, when X-raying parts

of the body for radiographic

quantitation,

to

expose a wedge of known composition to the

X-ray beam simultaneously

with the body part

being studied, in order to have a frame of ref-

erence for calibration.

Thus, the mean optical

S. DAvm RocKorr, Department National Institutes of Health

of Radioiogy,

Ż

FIOURE 1.--Top:

Frequency

distribution

of a typical

heterogeneous

X-ray beam.

Middle:

Diagrammatic

representation

of bone (left);

(right).

Bottom:

Densitometric

calibration scan lines

wedge across

bone (left)

and the calibration

wedge

(right),

showing the manner in which the mean optical den-

sity of bone is expressed

in terms of wedge thickness.

7

8

ITEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

density of the bone, obtained from densitomet-

ric scanning of the radiographic

image of the

bone, is then expressed in terms of thickness of

calibration wedge material which gives the same

optical density.

So far, the experimental

procedure appears

to be straightforward.

The end result of the

procedure depends upon the film response curve.

The factors affecting this curve are probably

among the least understood aspects of radio-

graphic densitometry,

and may well be the

source of discrepancies

among investigators.

Data are presented which may help clarify

some of the properties

of the film response

curve to help answer the question, "What fac-

tors in radiographic densitometry does the film

response curve allow us to vary and still obtain unbiased results ?"

First, does using a calibration wedge when X-raying a bone allow us to change the field size and still obtain the same results ?

Figure 2 shows data obtained by exposing a 15-cm thick presswood phantom and an

aluminum wedge simultaneously

to X-rays,

using X-ray beams of 30, 60, and 90 KVP, and

varying the field size between 13 and 60 cm

in diameter.

The marked difference in the

millimeter

of aluminum

equivalency

of the

phantom obtained at any given kilovoltage, due

only to the changes in field size, is readily seen. In addition, there is a marked difference in

results obtained by using X-ray beams of dif-

ferent peak energies.

Changes in field size and

in kilovoltage result in alteratidns in the appar-

ent amount of mineral present.

It is generally accepted that different results

are also obtained if different types of X-ray films are used, if different types of film holders

are used (for instance, if intensifying

screens

are used instead of cardboard holders), or if

there are marked variations in the processing

technique.

Therefore,

for a calibration wedge

to be an effective and reliable standard, it ap-

pears that the field size, kilovoltage, film type,

film holder, and film processing technique should be kept constant.

Figure 3 shows for what factors the film re-

sponse curve compensates.

If a 15-cm phantom

and calibration

wedge are exposed simultan-

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
15 cm.

26
lmtmm A1

anóom

2(1

;

L

.....

;8

=8

60 _;--"_.

FIGURE 2.--Millimeter

of aluminum

equivalent

of a

15-cm thick l)hantom,

using X-ray field sizes ranging

from 13 to 60 cm in diameter,

and X-ray energies

of 30, 60, and 90 KVP. Note that the size of the

field and the X-ray energy

the millimeter

of aluminum

level markedly equivalence

affect of the

phantom.

eously, and the overall densities of the films are

arbitrarily

changed simply by changing the

duration of the exposures, it is noted that for

any given X-ray beam between 30 and 90 KVP

the wedge equivalency of the phantom is es-

sentially unchanged, no matter how light or

dark the films may be. Theoretically,

there-

fore, there is no reason to make films very light

or very dark, from the quantitation standpoint, since the same results are obtained in each

instance.

Is there, in fact, a linear relationship between

the thickness of (or amount of mineral in) a

piece of bone and the equivalent amount of

wedge material in which it is expressed?

Let

us consider why it is desirable to have a linear

relationship

present.

Consider two situations,

one in which there is a linear relationship between the amount of mineral and wedge equivalency, and one in which there is not. In the first

THEORETICAL

ASPECTS

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOM-ETRY

9

15 cm PHANTOM 30 KVP
3.0 B
i

2.5

m

60 KVP 90 KMP
i Ę

t--
2.0--
z i,i D
.J
(J 15-
I-0..
o

Ę

Ę

X-ray fields demonstrates

the importance of

using s_ll X-ray fields when doing quantita-

tive densitometry. These are some of the sources of systematic

bias which may affect the film response curve

and the relationship of this curve to apparent mineral content. I would like to turn to what

may be done to the film response curve itself

to increase precision and convenience, while still

25-
60 cm field size

20 -

60 KVP

/i,,,

_/_9/0_ K VP

1.0--

Ę

Ę

Q

I

I

I

I

IO

15

20

25

30

ram. AI EQUIVALENT

FIGURE 3.--Plot of millimeter

of aluminum

equivalence

of a 15-cm phantom,

and the darkness

of the films

analyzed,

as expressed

in optical density.

Tests were

done at 30, 60, and 90 KVP. of the film, at any particular

Note that the darkness X-ray energy, has no

significant

effect on the millimeter

of aluminum

equivalence.

instance, there is a uniformly proportional

re-

lationship present.

That is, a given increment

in wedge material corresponds to a constant in-

crement of bone mineral at every level. I_ the

case of the nonlinear relationship, however, the

same increments in wedge equivalency corre-

spond to different increments of bone mineral,

depending upon where on the curve the data

points occur.

When phantom thicknesses are plotted against

millimeters of aluminum equivalency (fig. 4),

there is a generally linear relationship at 30, 60,

and 90 KVP when a small X-ray field (13 cm

in diameter) is used. _hen a large X-ray field

is used, however, this linear relationship

(in-

dicated by the broken lines) is apparently lost.

The fact that the elbows of the curves are always

in the downward direction suggests that these are real aberrations and are not due to random

variation.

This loss of linearity with large

15

__

I0-

l.-
z
I,I _J >
o
o
LD
E 25 E
2O
15

I
13cm field size

30 KVP
-
I
90 KVP
60 KVP /
30 KVP

10

0

I

I

5

I0

15

PHANTOM

THICKNESS (crn)

FIGURE 4.--Plot of millimeter

of aluminum

equivalents

and phantom

thickness

for a 13-cm diameter

field

(bottom)

and a 60-cm diameter

X-ray field (top).

Tests were done at 30, 60, and 90 KVP. Note that

with the large X-ray field, the linear relationship

present with the smaller X-ray field is lost.

10

DEVELOPMEONFTMETHODISN BONE DENSITOMETRY

O.d,

/

l'l'113fit o

FIDURE 5.--Typical

fihn response

curve

(optical

density vs. millimeter

thickness

of calibration

wedge)

is represented

by the solid line. The bias which is

introduced

by arbitrarily

curve is demonstrated

altering

the shape of this

by the broken line and the

arrows.

This bias does not apply to a transformation

of the curve, the transforms to the bone scan line.

of which are also applied

keeping it a reliable index of the amount of

mineral present in the specimen being studied.

In Figure 5 the solid line represents a film

response curve obtained by scanning densito-

metry of the radiographic

image of the calibra-

tion wedge (the plot of the optical density vs.

the millimeter thickness of the wedge). It is

quite permissible

to perform the procedures

upon the curve which would be necessary to

smooth the curve locally, that is, we may draw a

smooth curve through the random fluctuations

which occur due to film grain and electronic

noise. Linearization

of the curve over its entire

length, with subsequent expression of bone den-

sity in terms of the new line, is not permissible

since this erroneously gives tile same precision

over the entire range of optical densities and in-

troduces a varying bias into the results. On the

other ]land, expressing the area under a bone

scan curve in terms of a transformed

film re-

sponse curve is permissible, if the same trans-

fornfing procedures

are performed

point-to-

point on the bone scan values as were performed

on the film response curve. In figure 6 is shown

the scanning densitometric

and recording in-

strumentation

in use in this laboratory.

These introductory

remarks about the nature

of the fihn response curve and some of the fac-

tors which affect it should serve as useful back-

ground material.

FIGURE 6.--New,

versatile

scanning

and recording

instrumentation

in use in this laboratory.

N66 .?.7668

Quantitative Radiography of the Skeleton
in Living Systems

HAROLD Sc_

Department of Biophysics

The Pennsylvania

State University

The discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in 1895

probably ranks as one of the great scientific

discoveries.

Within three months of the dis-

covery, X-rays were being put to practical use in a Viennese hospital in connection with sur-

gery. The history of X-ray physics illustrates the importance to the entire world of research in pure science. Had Roentgen deliberately set about to discover some means of assisting surgeons in reducing fractures, it is almost certain that he would never have been working with the evacuated tubes, induction coils, and the like, which led to his famous discovery

(Richtmeyer

et al., 1955).

One of the many possible biomedical applica-

tions of this discovery is the accurate assess-

ment of the bone mineral content of a living

subject. The need for such a method is clearly

evident by the many investigations

in this area.

The successful development of such a method

would assist significantly

in the detection of

normal skeletal variation, in the recognition of

the incipient or latent stages of pathological

conditions involving bone, or in the early re-

sponses of osseous disorders to therapy.

A practical quantitative

technique is de-

scribed for the measurement and evaluation of

bone mass and bone density from roentgeno-

grams. Evidence is presented that the use of

this procedure provides data from animals and

man which correlate with physical and chemical

properties of bone, and with alterations of phys-

iological and pathological

significance in the

skeletal system.

792-955 0.--66_2

The method in use at Pennsylvania

State

University has gone through a long period of

development beginning in 1927 under the aegis

of P. B. Mack. An apparatus was developed by

Brown (1949) which greatly facilitated the ex-

traction of information

from suitably exposed

and standardized

roentgenograms.

This ap-

paratus was referred to as a bone density com-

puting machine and formed the basis of the

present equipment which was developed in 1957

during my supervision of the laboratory.

THE X-RAY PROCEDURE

Any medical X-ray machine which is oper-

able in the 50 to 60 kv range may be used. A

small focal spot is desirable (we use a 1 mm

focal spot). No-screen X-ray film in cardboard

holders is employed.

Intensifier

screens are

avoided because the scattering effect of the crys-

tals diffuses the image, thereby reducing the

sharpness

of detail.

In addition,

different

screens may vary in the size of the crystals, and

image clarity may differ from laboratory

to

laboratory (Files, 1959).

A specially designed, standardized

aluminum-

zinc alloy wedge (fig. 1) is simultaneously

ex-

posed with the anatomical

part of interest.

This wedge is of uniform composition,

is me-

chanically stable, easily machined, and is a

goad analogue of bone. It contains 92.8% alu-

minum and 7.2% zinc. A mass of this alloy was

1)roduced by the Aluminum Company of Ameri-

ca in one melt to provide a large quantity of

homogeneous material.

A sufficient supply of

I1

.

..

12

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

this material is on hand $0 .that many wedges may be fabricated in -the interest of universal standardization. Several wedges are presently on loan to investigators in different parts of the world.
FIQUR1E.-The aluminum alloy wedge which is used as the standard is 14 cm long, 14 mm in width and depth at the thick end, and is 2 mm wide at the tip. The slope is 0.1.
Roentgenograms of the bone to be evaluated are taken according to a technique which is standardized for all possible factors, such as positioning of subject and the wedge, exposure factors, film processing, and other factors. Typical exposure factors for ad adult hand would be 55 kv peak and 18 milliampere seconds (MAS) using a 2 mm aluminum filter. The MAS is varied with tube to film distance and mass of the bone. The carefully developed film is then analyzed in the densitometric equipment.
BONE DENSITY MEASURING EQUIPMENT
The densitometer consists of a Leeds and Northrup Microphotometer, a Speedomax Recorder (Type G-Model SSOOO), and an electronic analogue computer (fig. 2 ) . The tungsten scanning lamp of the microphotometer projects a beam of white light through the radiograph. The intensity of the transmitted light is proportional to the optical.density of the radiograph which is, in turn, proportional to the X-ray absorbing properties of the tissue. This light intensity is transformed by a photo-

multiplier into an electromotive force (emf) which drives the recorder and its balancing circuit. The position of the slide wire contact in this circuit indicates the magnitude of the emf and controls the position of the pen, which records on a chart. The relationship between the chart speed and the film scanning speed is known and controlled.
The X-ray image of the wedge is scanned within prechosen film density limits and its X-ray absorption curve is plotted by the recorder. Ten coordinates of the curve are then set on ten computer potentiometers which impress the X-ray absorption curve of the wedge as a potential curve on a ten-tap helipot mechanically attached to the recorder shaft. I n this way the voltage drop of the helipot a t any instant is a function of both the pen position and the X-ray absorption curve of the wedge. The bone and soft tissue image is then placed in position and scanned along a selected line, called a trace path. An instantaneous comparison is thus made of the X-ray absorption of a small section of tissue, determined by the area of the scanning beam, with the equivalent X-ray absorption thickness of the wedge. The equivalent wedge thickness potentials previously imposed on the helipot are integrated over the time it takes to scan the tissue. This integrated potential is stored in a capacitor and is proportional to the total mass of absorbing material scanned. When the tracing of the bone and soft tissue image has been completed, the stored potential is balanced against a 10-turn potentiometer with a 3-digit dial. The resulting count is directly proportional to the mass of the tissue whose radiograph was scanned. This value is termed the X-ray mass coefficient after it has been adjusted for equipment calibration, scanning speed, and other mechanical variables. By closely approximating the cross-sectional area of the scanned section, the X-ray density coefficient can be computed.
COMPUTATION OF X-RAY MASS COEFFICIENT
The rat femur will be used as a model for discussing the method of bone mineral content analysis and some of the associated problems.

..

&O&TITATnZ RADIOGRAPHY O F "E SKELETOX IN LITm-G SYSTEMS

13

A

A

FIGITEE2.-The photodensitometric equipment used for determining the bone mass and/or densi@ from X-ray films of living subjects. The microphotodensitometer is on the right; the recorder is central; and the analogue computer is to the left.

The small size of the rat femur amplifies certain errors. pn rticularly those concerned with linear measurements. For example, the length of the trace path as represented on the chart paper ran n r v h j as much as 5 F because of human error in deciding its limits. This error mould he reduced RS the trace path length increased.
I n selecting the trace path, it is essential that the bone mass per unit area across the slit be essentially constant. If the bone mass per unit area at one end of the slit varied greatly from that at the other end, the result T o d d be an incorrect equivalent wedge thickness. The erroneous ralue results from giving equal meight to the distribution of intensities orer the slit and comparing this average intensity with a point of equal intensity on the wedge trace. Since the response of X-ray film to X-radiation is not linear, the image resulting from the different amounts of bone mineral is not n linear function of its mass and is a possible source of error.

The method of calculating the bone density coefficient ( p ' ) depends on the correction for the soft tissue surrounding the bone.
The formula is as follon-s:

Cnuomunbteerr=Calibration

X

Increments Chart diT..ion

C(hLaSrt)s(PpeWedXs," x'dx
where counter number=the number which appears on
the dial of the potentiometer calibration=number of counts per chart increment per minute. This is an equipment function and directly influences the total count increments=a unit on the vertical axis of the chart paper which depends on the speed with which the wedge vias traced and the length of wedge

14

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

░░

required to cover the range

of film opacity

chart division=major

division on the chart

paper in the vertical axis

chart speed = speed of recorder in divisions

per minute

LS=speed of scan of wedge

PS=speed

of scan of bone image

x=distance in centimeters along

the object trace path x'_--distance in centimeters along

the wedge that will give

the equivalent ness

wedge thick-

(b-a)----the length of the trace path

(bone diameter)

The factors outside the integral are mechanical

variables which are independent.

These factors

can be reduced to a simpler expression so that

Counter number-- (Calibration)(ps()t)X (0.1) ._ x'dx

Reference to figure 3 will further illustrate

the calculation procedure.

It is a reproduction

of an absorption trace across the wedge and

across a rat femur. D is the pen deflection and

x' is the distance along the wedge. The interval

between (a) and (b), where (b--a=d)

is the

femur width and also includes the pen deflection due to the soft tissue ventral and dorsal to the

bone. The region to both sides represents the

pen deflection due to soft tissue only. The

assumption is that the deflection due to the

soft tissue in the bone region can be approxima-

ated by interpolating

between the soft tissue

deflection on either side of the bone and soft

tissue region with a straight line. The e_uation of this line can be written

D(x) =ax+f_
where a and _ are the slope and intercept, respectively, of the line. To perform the integral

x' is determined that

as a function of x by requiring D(z) =D(x').

This is automatically

performed by the electron-

ic computer.

Since the wedge trace is approxi-

mately a straight line in the deflection range of

the interpolated

soft tissue, it may be described

by the equation

D(x') =,_'x' + y.

By substitution

and performing the integral an

expression is arrived at for the soft tissue counter

number in the bone region,

Soft tissue count -(Calibrati░n)

(0.1) dX

(PS) (t)

The counter number for the bone becomes

Bone count=Total

count
(Calibration) (0.1) k dX (PS) (t)

The (k) is an empirically determined

constant

to adjust the final value to a realistic one and

may be omitted if one is interested only in

comparative

values. The bone density co-

efficient p' is obtained from the expression

p,= (Total count) (t) (PS) kX

(Calibration) (d _)

d

It follows that the bone mass coefficient (BMC) can be found from the expression BMC----p'd 2.
The procedure developed for the rat femur is a general one and can be applied to other skeletal members in other animals where there is rela-
tively little soft tissue. The method used for the phalanx was developed earlier and differs in certain details dealing with the soft tissue cor-
rection. The rat technique, applied to the phalanx, gives essentially the same results as the phalanx technique.

SOURCES

OF ERROR

The radiographic_ measuring, and computing procedures are subject to certain errors, some of which are unavoidable and most of which can

be minimized by close adherence to prescribed

operating instructions.

All the pitfalls of the radiographic

procedure,

from positioning the subject to final develop-

QIIAZqTITATIVE

RADIOGRAPI_

OF THE SKELETON

IN L1WII_G SYSTEMS

15

V/'

TRACE

w-
_r

_N_RPOU_TEDSOFT
TISSUE DEFECTION

=0 x_a

x = a + d/2 d = b-a

x' = X equals the intet-
_x_|ated loft t_mse equivalent wedge thickness

F_GURE 3.--Diagram

of a densitometer

absorption

trace

across the central portion of the femur of a living rat

and along the standard

wedge.

ment of the film, are prime sources of errone-

ous evaluations.

The anatomic part to be

studied must be reproducibly positioned in rela-

tion to the X-ray tube and table so that all suc-

ceeding films exhibit exactly the same trace

path. Tile tive position these details

wedge must occupy the same relaon all fihns. Rigid attention to tends to systematize errors such as

the nonuniformity

of the X-ray intensity over

the wave front which is emitted from the focal

spot of the tube.

Tile problem of scattered radiation can be con-

siderable, especially when dealing with bones

embedded in a large amount of flesh such as the

upper femur or vertebrae.

Studies in our lab-

oratory indicate that the scattering error in the

radiographic

technique increases with the size of

the bone and probably does not exceed 5% for

most bones. The soft tissue surrounding

the

bone contributes the major portion of scattered

radiation (Mayer et al., 1960).

Errors in measuring

arise largely from

failure to employ the identical trace path in re-

peated tracings and rarely to factors inherent

in the densitometric

equipment.

The difficulty

of locating identical trace paths can be mini-

mized by repeating the measurements

at least

twice and using the average value. Also, aver-

aging the values of several trace paths for each bone reduced this error.

The unce_ainty

of e_im_ting

the cross-sec-

tional shape for computing the X-ray density

coefficient introduces an error. Many irregu-

larities in the shape of the bone cannot be ob-

served in the roentgenogram,

and the error thus

introduced is virtually impossible to eliminate.

Although this type of error may tend to be uni-

formly present in any given trace path, the

efforts of age, osseous disease, and use and dis-

use of the cross-sectional

shape have not been

well characterized.

Over a relatively short

period of time, however, comparing the same

trace path in the same individual should not

seriously affect the usefulness of the technique.

In general, for intrasubject comparisons, the

X-ray mass coefficient, which does not necessi-

tate cross-section

area measurement,

may be

nmre useful than density coefficients since the

former removes a degree of uncertainty in the

measurement.

REPRODUCIBILITY

A system of checks has been devised to test

the operation of the densitometric

equipment.

Each day of operation, the computer is cali-

brated by determining

the number which ap-

pears on the counter dial in one minute (counts

per minute) of wide-open operation.

For 100

days of operation, the mean count per minute

was 562 with a standard deviation of 8.3 (an

insignificant error).

Another equipment check

was devised as follows: An X-ray film of a

wedge was traced along its length in the usual

manner. The curve was then set in the com-

puter potentiometers and the wedge image was

traced again. At prescribed distrances along

the wedge, the corresponding

counter value was

taken. This reading was divided by the cali-

bration. This procedure was repeated 30 times in order to set the limits of variation which could

16

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

be expected. The results expressed as counts per calibration for each segment of the wedge are shown in table I. The first two wedge seg-

ments are 0.5 cm apart; the others are 1 cm apart. When any succeeding wedge test film is run, always X-raying the same wedge, it is

required that no more than two segment values
of the wedge test film differ by one standard deviation from the values shown in the table.

This procedure tests all aspects function, including the operator. do not fall into acceptable limits,

of apparatus If the values the equipment

is checked for malfunction.

At first this pro-

cedure was followed every day; but since ac-

ceptable performance

was the rule, it was re-

duced to every other day when the apparatus was in constant use.

TABLE I.--Equipment

Check Based on Stand-

ard Wedge

Wedge

Section value

section a

(mean) b

Standard deviation

O. O5O .081 .328 .558 Ę 802
1.014 1.267 1. 396

0.004 .002 .008 .OO8 .012 .016 .027 .026

Wedge sections 1 and 2 are 0.5 em long. All others are 1 cm long. b The wedge was traced thirty times. The count for each section of wedge was divided by the machine calibration which resulted in a section value.

BETWEEN

EVALUATION

ERROR

A series of routine phalanx and os calcis films

sent to us from a cooperating research group was used to determine the error between two evalua-

tions of 40 films. The mean difference between

the two readings error of 0.40.

was 2.66%, with a standard

BETWEEN

FILM ERROR

A series of subjects had two consecutive films taken of tile phalanx and os calcis. Each film was evaluated twice, which is routine practice.

The mean difference between the bone density values of two fihns for 40 pairs of routine films was 3.34%, with a standard error of 0.45. The

between-film error is slightly higher than the error found between evaluation of the same film

and may be attributed to differences
ing the subject, in film processing, technical factors.

in positionand other

CORRELATION

OF X-RAY MASS AND

DENSITY

VALUES

WITH THE PHYSI-

CAL AND CHEMICAL

PROPERTIES

OF

BONE

Until about six years ago, density measure-

ments were employed in many laboratories al-

though there was little proof of the validity of

such measurements

from experimental

data.

We performed a series of experiments to demon-

strate to ourselves, as well as to others, that the

procedure had a sound basis as judged from em-

pirically derived results. It was found that

calibrated radiographs of excised rat femur segments and whole human femurs were highly correlated with their weights ; the correlation co-

efficients were 0.99 and 0.98, respectively (Schraer et al., 1959 ; Baker and Schraer, 1958). The soft tissue problem for the rat was not a

serious one since the X-ray mass and density coefficients of the intact femur and of the same

excised femur were highly correlated (r=0.95

and 0.92, respectively).

See table II for details.

TABLE II.--Pereent

Change

efficient of 5-Week-Old-Rats

on Experimental

Diets

in Bone Mass CoAfter 24 Hours

Sum of bone mass

Group (calcium

coefficient of all trace

Percent

content of

N

paths

change in

diet %)

bone mass

coefficient

Initial

24 hours

0.025 .17 .91
1.49

7

0. 070

6

.064

7

.063

7

.060

0. 058 .058 .068 .066

--17.14 --9.37 +6.35
+10.00

In a more recent experiment (Schraer et al.,

unpublished

results), an X-ray procedure was

developed for experiments

with the domestic

hen. To demonstrate the validity of the method

QUANTITATITE

RADIOGRAPttY

OF THE SKELETON

IN LIVING SYSTEMS

17

with this animal, the following experiment was

performed.

Nineteen laying, white leghorn

hens were radiographed

in viva for quantitative

radiography

without anesthesia.

The tibia-

tarsus seemed to be the most suitable bone from

a positioning and physiological Three trace paths were chosen tarsus: one was at the center

point of view. on the left tibioof the bone and

the other two were 10% of the bone length distally and proximally from the center trace path. Each film was evaluated once and a mean X-ray mass coefficient was calculated for each bone.

Inunediately

after X-raying,

the hens were

sacrificed and the left tibio-tarsi were removed.

The corresponding

cylinders of bone delineated

on X-ray images by the outer trace paths were

removed, dried at 100 ░ C, and defatted with a

1:1 alcohol-ether solution in a Soxhlet appara-

tus. _'hen the weights of the dried-defatted

cylinders were compared with their correspond-

ing X-ray mass coefficients, a correlation coef-

ficient of 0.96 was obtained (fig. 4), thus

corroborating

the earlier work with rats.

NUTRITIONAL APPLICATIONS

AND PHYSIOLOGICAL

The efficacy of the technique has been indicated in various published studies: the skeletal response of rats to alteration of the calcium

content of the diet (Schraer et al., 1963), the skeletal response of the rat to hypoxia (Hunt and Schraer, 1965), and normal and induced bone mass fluctuations in birds (Schraer and Schraer, 1961; Mueller et al., 1964).

BONE DENSITY

IN HUMANS

Much data have been accumulated in which

in vivo measurements

of bone density in hu-

mans have been shown to be related to age, sex,

nutritional

history, and metabolic disorders.

Bone density coefficients of phalanx 5-2 and the

os calcis increase up to the age of 20 years and

subsequently

diminish

in value. Females

showed a more rapid decline with age than did

the males (Sehraer, 1958; Odland et al., 1958;

Schraer, 1962). In a study of age changes in

men, a loss in phalangeal density of 0.48% of

age was observed over the age span 80 to 80

years (Norris et al., 1963). There appears to

be a correlation between long-continued

calcium

intake and bone density values (Thorangkul

et al., 1959) ; however, this relationship has not

been observed consistently (Fisher and Dodds,

1958). A significant correlation in women was found to exist between both serum vitamin A

and serum cholesterol and phalangeal density coefficients; a similar correlation was not noted in men. Also, a highly significant correlation

.5
o >
T, .4
░_
a) .3

y-.369x s.I,,.015 r=.96

+ .039

: _::.:l ░;░ % ░
e,_, Ę

.". ░

.2
>-
a: .I
!
x

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

0

.I

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

1.0

I. I

1.2 1.3

BONE SECTION WEIGHT

(Grams)

F'mmaE 4.--The

correlation

and the weight
resulta)

of the

between the X-ray same bone segment

mass coefficient of the

removed,

dried, and

left tibia-tarsus

of the intact, living hen

defatted.

(Schraer

et al., unpublished

18

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

was observed in a geographically

localized

group of women between ascorbic acid intake

and the as calcis density coefficient (Morgan et al., 1962).
The decreased bone density associated with

age and the widespread occurrence of osteopo-

roses in all age groups, especially in the aged,

make it important

to distinguish

between

normal and pathological bone density values.

Subjects diagnosed clinically as having osteoporoses associated with different diseases had

lower phalangeal density coefficients than the

average value for subjects of the same age with

no known pathology (Schraer, 1962). Osteo-

I.O0.

Trace path A

.50

1.50

_Z

5I

_

1.0

o .5ou._.._
U_ 1.75 1.50 fl"_

Trace path B Trace path C

,.ioil o'.7 rlll

tl

.50
4,-50

5,-60

6,-70

7,-80

AGE (years)

FIGURE &--The phalangeal porotic men (black bars)

density coefficients

of osteo-

are shown with the controls.

Standard

deviations

are included where

are sufficient for statistical

treatment.

the numbers

Numbers

of

subjects for each age group are indicated of trace path C ( Schraer, 1962).

on the graph

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

.25

.50

.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75

I

31-40

41-50 51-60

%_'%J

Omteomalacia (0)
'-t-, leo

t Path A

z 31-40
Q:
_ 41-50
51-60

_x\\\\\_.\_'_

PH
Jzo
o
Izo

t Path B

31-40

41-50 51-60

\\\\\\\\\\\1

PH
J]o ,.---p---. o
Izo

Path C

.25

.50

Z5

1.00

I.?-5

1.50

1.75

13-15

16-20

_;

,,

,___.j___.,

Oltloporolil

(IO)

I Renal Oetaadystrophy

(RO)

_l- Path A

13-15
13-15 16-20

IO )))I RO

Path B

'

I

I

IO

L Path C

"-| RO

J

FIGURE 6.--A comparison

of phalangeal

density

co-

efficients of four women (top) and two boys (bottom)

with metabolic bone disease and subjects with normal

or control values (white bars).

Standard

deviations

are indicated

for the controls

(Schraer,

1962).

porotic men, ranging in age from 41 to 80 years, had values which were lower than average for

the same age and sex (fig. 5). In figure 6 a and

b, control or average values for a particular age

and sex are compared with values from subjects

having different metabolic bone diseases. The

lower values of the pathological

subjects prob-

ably could be detected in many cases by subjec-

tive evaluation of radiography.

However, the

use of quantitative

radiography

allows one to

assign a discrete number value to a particular

subject with greater precision and accuracy.

The collection of extensive data to establish

average values for a particular age and sex and

perhaps for a particular environment should be

initiated.

From these data it should be possible

to establish optimal and suboptimal values and

QUANTITATI_'E

RADIOGRAPHY

OF THE SKELETON

_ LIVLNG SYSTEMS

19

those which are clearly pathological. These data coupled with the subjects' history may

simplify and establish a firmer basis for the detection of latent pathological conditions affecting the skeletal system, for the early application of preventive medicine, and may assist particularly in the early diagnosis of osteoporosis whatever its cause.

Finally, one must be cognizant of the respon-

siveness of the .... ,_._ 1 .........

.l _1.. o_llu

t.,llu

l&_lva

t .v

of the technique in order to use effectively the nondestructive methods of bone mineral deter-

ruination. In table III, four methods for de-

termining bone mineral content in vivo are compared. For the sake of simplicity, let us as-

sume that an individual has 1000 g of calcium in his skeleton and one is interested in deter-

mining changes in his bone mineral content as a result of treatment. The pertinent question

is: How much calcium must be accrued by the skeleton before it can be detected by the same nondestructive method._ Although it is well known that cancellous bone is more labile than
compact bone, and that the skeletal members differ in their response to skeletal disorders, the calcium accrued in this illustration is as-
sumed to be evenly distributed over the entire skeleton. For the hypothetical method, which has an error of 1%, it wov.ld r_qui_ 100 days on a positive balance of 0.1 g calcium/day or 25 days on a 0.4-g calcium balance before detectable changes would occur if the changes were generalized. For conventional radiography, at least two years would be required on the 0A g day balance to observe bone changes. If these examples are reasonable, then the quantitative methods discussed here deserve wider
application.

TABLE III.--Changes in Calcium Content of a Skeleton Detectable by Nondestructive (the subject is assunwd to have 1000 grams of calcium in his skelvtou)

Techniques

Method of detection

% Error in technique

% Error in grams of ealcimn

Days required fo_ detection depending on calcium balance

0.1 g/day

0.4 g/day

Hypothetical Monochromatic
raphy. Conventional

................................... radiation and quantitative

radiography

.......................

radiog-

1 3-5
3O

10 30-50
3OO

100 300-500
3000

25 75-125
750

REFERENCES

BAKER, P. T. ; and SCH_,

H. : The Estimation

of Dry Skeletal Weight by Photometry

of

Roentgenograms.

Human Biol., vol. 30, 1958, pp. 171-184.

BROWN, W. M., fiR.: Bone Density Computing

Machine.

Proc. Natl. Electron. Conf., vol.

5, 1949, pp. 64-71.

FILES, G. W. : Medical Radiographic

Technic.

Second edition, Charles C. Thomas, Spring-

field, Illinois, 1959.

FISHER,

K. H. ; and DODDS, M. L. : Calcium

Am. Diete. Assoc., vol. 34, 1958, p. 392.

Intake

of Adolescents

and Young Adults.

J.

HUDSON, G. : Volume and Cellular Constitution

of Bone Marrow in Guinea Pigs Hypoxic

from Birth.

Blood, vol. 16, no. 2, 1960, pp. 1199-1204.

HUGOINS, C.; and BL_CKS0N, H. B. : Changes in Outlying Bone Marrow Accompanying

a

Local Increase

of Temperature

Within PhysiologicaI

Limits.

J. Exptl. Med., vol. 64,

1936, pp. 253-273.

HUNT, R. ; and SCHRAZR, H. : Skeletal Response

of Rats Exposed to Reduced Barometric

Pressure.

Am. J. Physiol.

(In press), 1965.

am

2O

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

MAYER, E. H. ; TROSTLE, H. G. ; ACKERMAN, E. ; SCHRAER, H. ; and SITTLER, O. D." A

Scintillation

Counter Technique

for the X-ray Determination

of Bone Mineral Con-

tent. Radiation

Res., vol. 13, 1960, pp. 156-167.

MCDONALD, M. R. ; and RIDDLE, D." The Effect of Reproduction

and Estrogen

Adminis-

tration on the Partition

of Calcium,

Phospherous,

and Nitrogen

in Pigeon Plasma.

J. Biol. Chem., vol. 159, 1945, p. 445.

MORGAN, A. F. ; GILUM, H. L. ; GIFFORD, E. D. ; and WILCOX, E. B. : Bone Density

of an

Aging Population.

Am. J. Clin. Nutr., vol. 10, 1962, p. 337.

MUELLER, W. ,_. ; SCHRAER, R. ; and SCHRAER, H. : Calcium Metabolism

namics of Laying Pullets.

J. Nutr., vol. 84, 1964, pp. 20-26.

and Skeletal Dy-

ODLAND, L. M. ; WARNICK, K. P. ; and E_SELBAUGH, N. C. : Cooperative

Nutritional

Status

Studies in the Western Region.

II. Bone Density,

Montana Agr. Expt. Station Bull.,

No. 534, Jan. 1958.

RICHTMEYER,

F. i.; KENNARD, E. H.; and I_UP_TSEN,

T.: Introduction

to Modern

Physics, McGraw-Hill

Book Co., Inc., New York, 1955.

SCHRAER, I-I. ; SCHRAER, R. ; TROSTLE, H. G. ; and D'ALFONSO, A. : The Validity of Measur-

ing Bone Density from Roentgenograms

by Means of a Bone Computing

Apparatus.

Arch. Biochem. Biophys., vol. 83, 1959, pp. 486-500.

SCHRAER, H. : Variation

in the Density

of the os calcis

and Phalanx

with Sex and Age.

J. Pediat., vol. 52, 1958, p. 416. SCHRAER, H. ; and SCHRAER, R. : Bone

Mass

Changes

in Hens observed

in vivo During

the Egg Laying Cycle.

Experientia,

vol. 17, 196L p. 255.

SCHRAER,

HAROLD;

SIAR, W. J. ; and SCHRAER, ROSEMARY: Changes in Bone Mass and

Density in Living Rats During the Manipulation

of Calcium

Intake.

Arch. Biochem.

Biophys., vol. 100, 1963, pp. 393-398.

SCHRAER, H. ; MUELLER, W. J. ; and SCHRAER, R. : Unpublished

results.

SCHRAER, H. : Unpublished

results.

SIMKISS, K. : Calcium

Metabolism

and Avian Reproduction.

Biol. Bey., vol. 36, 1961,

pp. 321-367.

TI-IORA_GXVL, D. ; JOHNSON, F. A. ; KIME, N. S. ; and CLARK, S. J. : Adaptation

to a Low-

Calicum

Intake.

J. Am. Dieter. Assoc., vol. 34, 1958, p. 392.

VAN LIERE, E. J. ; and STICKNEY, J. C. : Hypoxia.

University

of Chicago Press, 1963.

COMMENTS

Dr. CAMEROr_. Here is an instrumentation

question

on your in your

lens for measuring

the transmission

densitometer.

W'nat was the width

of light of that

slit, and how does that compare? Dr. SCHRAER. The height of the slit is 1 mm.

Dr. CAMgaON. The point I wanted

to make is that

if this width is compara,ble

to your cortical thickness

in these small bones, an experimental

error can be

introduced

which will not be picked up by wedge or

any other technique. Dr. SCHRAER. Tlmt

is right.

In a rat, it would be

very important;

in a large animal, it would not be im-

portant.

The scale is absolute ; as you get smaller, the

slit looks bigger, and I do not know the error. Dr. CAMERON. It is true that you get better measure-

ments of the smaller bones because of lack of tissue,

and as you have larger bones, you reduce certain

er-

rors; what is the optimum

of bone size using your

technique? Dr. 'SCHRAER.

I would

like to see a bone the size of

the human femur that is round, with no soft tissue.

Dr. CAMERON. The term "density"

is used so often

here in the two contexts

that it is quite confusing

to

me. It is fihn density and bone density.

I think that

the future speakers

also should be very careful when

they use the term "density"

in what sense they are us-

ing this term. Dr. SCHRAER. I agree.

t166-: 766_9

Measurement of Cortical Bone Volume and
Lumbar Spine Density

B. E. C. No_m, E. B_.._rr, D. A. SMrrH
General Infirmary, University of Leeds

Osteoporosis can best be defined as a condition in which there is a reduction in the volume

of bony tissue per unit volume of anatomical bone. This reduction in the volume of bony tis-

sue may affect trabecular or cortical bone or

both. Loss of cortical bone can generally be

determined

by morphological

measurements

(except in the spine, which is a special case),

but loss of trabecular bone can only be de-

tected by changes in the absorption of X-rays

or other radiation by the bone--unless the scan-

ning method of Virtama and Kallio (1961) can be applied to man.

MEASUREMENT VOLUME

OF CORTICAL

BONE

Methodology

Barnett and l_ordin (1960) reported three

morphological

measurements

applicable to the

metacarpal, the femur, and the vertebrae (fig.

1). The first was the thickness of the cortex of

the second metacarpal of the right hand at its

midpoint expressed as a percentage of the total

diameter.

The second was a similar measure-

ment on the PA X-ray of the femur at the thickest point of the cortex. The third was a meas-

urement of biconcavity

in which the central

height of the best-centered lumbar vertebra in

the lateral view was divided by its height am

teriorly.

All the measurements

were made on

the X-rays with calipers produced by Universal

Indicators, Ltd. (fig. 2). It was subsequently

found that biconcavity was frequently difficult to determine on plain lateral spine films owing

to overlapping of surfaces (fig. 3) ; and, there-

fore, the lateral tomogram in the sagittal plane

was adopted for these measurements

(fig. 4).

We chose to express cortical thickness as a per-

centage of total diameter in order to correct for

absolute size because it was assumed that big

metacarpals and femora would normally have

proportionately

thick cortices, i.e., that there

was in normal persons some correlation between

cortical thickness and bone diameter.

Garn

(personal communication)

states that there is

no such correlation and prefers to express his re-

sults as absolute thickness.

Figure 5 which is

based on 15 measurements

of male metacarpals

suggests that there may be a correlation between

shaft and cortical thickness.

Results in Normal Individuals

Barnett and Nordin (1960) reported results

in lg5 normal individuals aged 20 to 80 years and suggested that the following standards of normality might be adopted :

Metacarpal index should be over 43%. Femoral index should be over 45 %.

Biconcavity index should be over 80%.

The only one of these measurements

which

showed any significant fall with age was the

metacarpal measurement, but both it and proba-

bly the femoral index should always be related

to age since thinning of cortex appears to be an

almost inevitable aging process. Biconcavity

does not e however, appear to develop with age in

"normal" persons, and they should probably always have an index over 80%. We suggested that osteoporosis was present when the indices

21

22

DEVELOPMENT

OF METttODS

IN BONE DENS,ITOMETRY

.o

j

,

I

I

', '

I

,I

CD░XY --
AB

= Femur Score

óD +XY

--

: Hand Score

AB

AB CD
Lumbar Spine Score

FIGURE L--Diagrammatic

representation

of anatomical

cortical

thickness,

measurements

of metacarpal

and biconcavity.

cortical

thickness,

femoral

fell below the lower normal limits and we coined

the terms "central" and "peripheral"

osteo-

porosis, the latter being present when the com-

bined cortical indices were 88% or less.

We have applied these measurements

to a

study of 152 normal women in Glasgow, with the results shown in figures 6, 7, and 8. Our previous observations have been confirmed that

metacarpal cortical thickness falls with age

(fig. 6), but we find that this fall is very slow

until the beginning of the seventh decade, when

it accelerates.

The only 5-year ao-e group in

which the index is significantly lower than in the

preceding five years is the 60- to 64-year group.

Not until the seventh decade do a significant

number of normal women fall below our previous lower normal limit of 44%. Femoral

cortical thickness also falls with age, but the fall

is very slight until the end of the seventh decade,

when it accelerates (fig. 7). Biconcavity does

not appear to be an accompaniment normal women (fig. 8).

of aging in

Corresponding

studies on normal men are

not yet complete, but data collected so far, given

in figure 9, show very little fall of metacarpal

index with age. These male and female meta-

carpal data are very similar to those of Garn

et al. (1964).

Validation of Method

Our results in clinical osteoporosis are re-

FIGURE 2.--Calipers

used for X-ray measurements

and

ported in a later paper. At this stage it is suf-

made by British Indicators,

Ltd.

ficient to say that comparison of these X-ray

..

CORTICAL BOSE V O L m AXD LUMBAR SPINE DESSITY

23

*

FIGI-RE3.-Lnternl lumbar spine X-ray in a rase of octeoporoGk to illuctrate the diBiru1t.r in mea~uriilig biconcavity preci.ely.

FIGV'X%E-Lateral lumbar spine tomogram t o shorn r-rrtebrol 1,od.r outline f o r measurement of biconm1Tit.r.

indices with iliac crest biopsies in 100 consecutire patients shon-ed a t;ignificant correlat'1011 betv-een the two (fig.10). Moreorer, tlie diriding line bet\\-een the osteoporotic and noriiial states in tlie iliac crest ( 1 6 5 of the biopsy area occupied by tlie bone) corresponded reasonably well with the division betxeen the osteoporotic and normal X-ray indices (total "score" 168/ 300). Severtliele~s,it 11-asapparent that these morpliologicnl 1iie:tsiireiiieiitswere relatit-elj-inseneitive menwres of osteoporosis, since we not iiifreqneiitly s i w Cii?es of undoubted q ~ i i i aol steoporo& v-it11 r e rt ical t riik c n lat ion. obvious loss of den-it-. or even conipression. in 11-liicli all tlie indices were noi.ni;il. Thus 0111- method \vas liable to false negatives though not. as f a r its we knew, to false positives. We therefore tnrned our attention to spinal densitometry.

LUMBAR SPINE DEl\rSITOMETRY
Methodology
The main obstacle in the \\-a>-of lumbar spine cleiisitoi~ietrl~ias always been that of correcting for the n r i a h l e soft tissue mass of the subject. The basis of our method is the comparison of the density of the vertebrae n-ith that af the intervertebral discs in order to eliminate soft tissue differences. Since this difference might he expected itcelf to depend to some extent upon exposure and technical factors. a phantom spine i.; introduced as a b*standard"aiicl the difference betx~eendisc :ind body den>it- in the patient is divided by the corresponding difference in the standard. The details follo~-.
The patient is X-rayed in the lateral position n-ith the pliaiitoiii spine placed immediately

24

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

behind. The phantom spine consists of three lumbar vertebrae obtained from the body of a

young man at postmortem.

It is mounted in

a perspex box, measuring 25.7 x 13.6 x 91.4 cm, filled with formol saline. The box is raised

on "Temex" soft tissue equivalent rubber (sup-

plied by James Girdler, Ltd., of London W.3)

80

7O

6C
50
r_. 4o E E
x 3o tu tfie 2o
O
U io

:. Ę", e'.- s.4

.

Ę

Ę O@

Q

Ę

Ę

Ę

Ę

OĘ

so 60

70 8o 90 ,oo SHAFT (ram.)

l_(}v-_m 5.--Relation

between metacarpal

shaft

and cortical thickness

in 151 consecutive

tions of males of all ages.

diameter observa-

METACARPAL INDEX

0-80 1"00 1 0"60"
0.40

Ę

"'. l':

"..-"_ i

4--t--

--

oĘ Ę Ę

o. _o 3'0

4'o

_

6'0

;o

;o

AGE

FIGURE 6.--Metacarpal

cortical thickness

(as percent-

age of shaft diameter)

in 152 normal women show-

ing two standard

errors either side of the mean.

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

until the phantom spine is at the same level as

the patient's spine. Rubber is also added at

the top, if necessary, to reach the same height

as the patient.

A saggital plane tomĘgram is

then taken of the patient and the phantom,

using screened film with a Phillips Danatome

type B. The exposure is kept, whenever pOS--

FEMORAL INDEX
0"80"

o(lg)
0"(50-(21
-

Ę

Ę

I ee .

Ę

Ę TĘ,

-

,

'/

-

Ę

"

_ "_E'2"2Y2_

=...,.::Ę..._...Ę._.

░░
Ę."

0.40-

oĘ

Ę

_

Ę

Ę

00

0.20

3'0

4'0

;o

6'o

7_

;o

AGE

_IGURE 7.--The

femoral

cortical

thtckne_ss

(expressed

as a percentage

of shaft diameter)

in 152 normal

women showing the meanĘ

two standard

errors either side of

BICONCAVIT

Y

INOEX

01-_"01

_Ę

O'T
3;

ĘĘ ĘĘ

Ę

Ęo

Ę

eeee

4'o

_o

go

,;

_;

AGE

FIGURE 8.--Biconcavity

index (mean and two standard

errors)

plotted against

age in 152 normal women.

NORMAL 70'
MALES

o60"

ĘĘ

Ę

o

a_50" _40"

3b

4b _so

AGE

_o

/o

_o

FIGURE 9.--Metecarpal

indices plotted normal men.

against

age in

-.

CORTICAL BONE VOLTIME AJ!lD LUMBAR SPIKE DESSITY

25

24 0
220
200
0 L
;180
h
D
$
-X 16C
U
L
0
I!4C
12c

r 0.52
P L0.01

0.
0 0

0 0 0

0

@

0

00

0

.

0

height of the disc tracing, and the resultant divided by the same difference on the standard tracing, which is scanned at the same densitometer setting. This is our usual calculation and is performed as falloffs, using the end plates asthe baseline:
Arerage height of discs in patient (6)minns Average height of vertebrae in patient (up)---- (1) Arerage height of discs in standard ( d . ) mbns (2)
Relative Terebral Density (R.V.D.)= ( 1 ) / ( 2 ) - - (3)
For c&sk i;"rps- we use the simple disc/ bod? ratio, which can be expressed as dp/vp.
The heights of the disc and vertebral tracings are obtained by dividing total disc area and

Y = .I

4

1 Ioc

0

2

4

6

B

IO

Btopsy Score

FIGTJF1L0E.-Relation between iliac crest biopsy (scored *isually on a 9 point scale) and the snm of metacarpal, femoral, and biconcaritr indices in a hnndred consecntire cases.

sible, Tithin the range 80 to 90 kV, 2 kV
beiig added per each cm of rubber. The film
is processed automatically and produces an image of the type s h o r n in @re 11.
The images of the patient and phantom spines are cut out and fed through an automatic recording densitometer (originally the Laurence Locarte, and more recently the Chromoscan made by Joyce Loebel of Xevcastle-on-Tyne) to yield the type of tracing shown in figure 12. On this tracing, the end plates, vertebral bodies, and intervertebral discs can easily be distinguished. The difference between the heights of the disc and vertebral tracings is due, of course, to the bone in the latter; and the first problem is to express this difference in quantitatire terms. This can be done in at least two ways. The difference can be expressed as a ratio, using either the end plates as a baseline or the absolutebaseline of the instrument (100% transmission). ,-llternatirely, the height of the vertebral tracing can be subtracted from the

FIGLX1E1.-Lateral lumbar spine tomogram on a normal subject with phantom.
END-PLATE-
-c D I S C
- E N D-" LATE
END-PLATE -
DISC
- E h:E-DLATE
- a 0 3 y
FIGCR1E2.-Example of densitometry tracing obtained from the phantom spine.

26

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

total vertebral area by width at the base, i.e., between the end plates. The result is, in fact, a function of height rather than height itself; and, owing to the shape of the disc tracing, (generally triangular) compared with that of the vertebral tracing (rectangular), it tends to underestimate disc height. The original procedure (Nordin et al., 1962) was to join the peaks of the disc tracings and the tops of the vertebral tracings; but this introduced a subjective element, which should be avoided.
Effect of Exposure Figure 13 shows the effect of exposure on the disc/body ratio of the phantom spine. The range is constant over the range of 82 to 90 kV.
Reproducibility The reproducibility of the method is illustrated in figure 14, which shows R.V.D. values determined within one month of each other in 31 patients.
Results in Normal Subjects The survey of 152 normal women already referred to yielded the R.V.D. values shown in figure 15. The fall with age is unmistakeable, but most of it occurs rather abruptly at about the age of 50-55 years. When menopausal age is taken into account, it is found that the fall in R.V.D. occurs in the 5-10 year period after the menopause. It is clear that it is essential to take age into account in establishing the normal R.V.D., and we would suggest that, using this method of calculation described :above, it should be over 0 in women before 50
6-0-
0 4.0-
cc
2o

„OS
«
0
>:
eó

-I0

-IS

-15

-I0

-OS

I

0

.05

R.V.D.

C)

+1_5 *10

FiGvPm 14.--Relation

between two measurements

of

relative vertebral density made within one month of

each other to show the reproducibility cedure.

of the pro-

years, and over -1 in women after 50 years. The negative values must not be taken literally ; they are to some extent artifactual. They arise both from the method of calculation, particularly from the division of disc height by base referred to above, and from the tomographic technique which tends to smear tissue shadows over each other, and smears the endplate shadow over the discs, making the latter appear more dense than they really are.
Corresponding values in a small number of normal men are given in figure 16 which also shows a definite fall in R.V.D. after the age of 50.
The relation between R.V.D. and metacarpal indices in normal subjects is shown in figures 17 and 18. It is clear that the R.V.D. and metacarpal indices are related in the women but not in the men. The significance of this is not clear at present.
APPENDIX
The reproducibility of the method has been calculated from the formula

I"

BO

82

84

85

B8

90

K.V

FIOURE 13.--Effect of varying kilovoltage upon the disc/body ratio of the phantom spine.

where d is the difference between duplicate analyses and n is the number of duplicate analyses.

CORTICAL BONE VOLUME

A_ND LUMBAR

SPIiN_E DENSITY

27

The results are as follows :
1. Duplicate estimations of relative vertebral density on the same film: error ▒0.15 (20 films).
2. Repeat X-rays on the same patients within 24 hours: error ▒0.29 ('2A
p_ti_ts).

3. Duplicate X-rays on the same patients within one month: error ▒0.31 (31 patients).

Note.--The

errors

given above are expressed

terms of R.V.D., the total scale of which extends

about --3.0 to -[-3.0. Since the error is probably

related to the R.V.D. value, it is not appropriate

express it as a percentage.

in from
not to

R.V.D.

o4

Ę

Ę

*3

go ░

Ę

*2

Ę

░1

Ę m 0░o

_o

-5 8O
AGE

l_Gvmz 15.--1Relation

between

sity and age in 152 normal

standard

errors).

relative

vertebral

den-

women (mean and two

„ „
....... ci
5-
0

I
I I" I I
Ę░

░, o░

; ._'.-.s..:.: Ę

n

. ".;. Ę Ę -"

Ęo░,_e

_ *o _░ o.

'*, "1 " _ .░

░

-" --_--_-_:':-7- " :

g Ę "ó...._: ó : .:'.:

:"'. "1

l I

I

ĘI
"1

I
I
io
I_ETA CAR PAL

INDEX ░Io

FIGURE 17.--Relation

between

sity and metacarpal

index

relative

vertebral

den-

in normal females.

+2C +1,0

Ę░

-I.0 I

-2 C

20

50

40

50

60

70

AGE

FZ0VRE 16.--Relation

between

relative vertebral

sity and age in 47 normal men.

80
den-

792-955 0--66-----3

+2
„1
ci
O
a_
-I

xx x x

x

_x_,_ x _ x

x_

x

x

_x

x

x

x

30

40

50

60

70

80

METACARPAL

INDEX 0/0

]L_o_m 18.--Relation

relative

vertebral

between density

metacarpal

index end

in 47 normal men.

28

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

.

REFERENCES

BARNETT, E. ; and NOEDIN, S. E. C. : Radiological vol. II, 1960, p. 166.

Diagnosis

of Osteoporosis.

Clin. Radiol.,

GAR_, S. M.; PAO, E. N.; and RIHL, Science, vol. 143, 1964, p. 1439.

M. E.:

Compact

Bone in Chinese and Japanese.

NORDIN, B. E. C. ; BARNETT, E. ; MACGREGOR, etry. Brit. Med. ft., vol. 1, 1962, p. 1793.

J. ; and NISBET,

J. : Lumber

Spine Densitom-

VIRTAMA, P. ; and KALLIO, E. : Bone Pattern Ann. Med. Exp. Biol. Fennial (Helsinki),

in Experimental

Osteoporesis

vol. 39, 1961, p. 154.

of the Rat.

COMMENTS

Dr. SMITH. Why do you pick the anterior and not the

posterior

vertical

height?

In view of the fact that

there is wedging,

you may throw off your ratio.

Dr. NORDIN. That is a good question.

You are ab-

solutely

right, of course.

In wedging,

this measure-

ment is completely

thrown out. It might be better to

use the posterior

vertical height as the denominator.

Dr.

STRANDJORD.

Which vertebrae

are you using now,

fourth or fifth, or which ?

Dr. NORDIN. We are normally

sighting

on the third

(lumbar),

but this depends on the picture.

We now

do this by tomography.

We started

doing this on a

simple lateral lumbar spine film. It works reasonably

well, but there are technical

reasons for technical

dif-

ficulties
on the third.

in it. We now do it entirely

by tomography

third or fourth lumbar vertebrae,

usually

the

Dr. S_ANDJORD. For the fourth and fifth lumbar ver-

tebrae, the posterior

height is frequently

than the anterior

height, so I do not think

be a balance.

much lower there would

Dr. NORDIN. Yes, that is a good point.

If I were

going to do it on the posterior

instead of the anterior,

I would have to re-evaluate

the figure.

It would have

to be redone, but I think it is a very reasonable

idea.

Dr.

TROTTER.

In making your caliper measurements

on the films, may I ask you if you have any trouble de-

ciding where the cancellous

substance

stops and the

compact substance

begins from the inside out?

Dr. NORDIN. This is a perfectly

fair question.

In

pathological

cases, for instance,

in hyperparathyroid-

ism, you do occasionally

find, particularly

in osteoma-

laeia with secondary

hyperparathyroidism

and renal

failure, cancellization

of the inner cortex.

We stated

in our where begins.

original paper the solid cortex

on this ceases

that we take the point and the caneellization

This really does not apply to these normal people

since practically to their cortex,

all of them have a sharp inner margin

but it does apply in pathological

states.

Dr. SMITH. I think this is a very important

point,

because the accuracy

of this method is not a function

of how sharp you make your point or your measure-

merit instrument,

but of where you pick the measure-

ment point on the film, which in my experience

is often

1 mm of blurred image. Dr. TROTTER. Even in normal

individuals

it is not

how accurate

your pointer is, but what your human

eye is doing, what the film technique

is, I think, that

is fundamental

to radiogrammetry.

Dr. NORDIN. This is not a point,

frankly,

that has

worried

us in the least.

In a normal case, I do not

think there is any doubt where this thick cortex ends.

You can see it on anybody's

tracing,

if you put these

bones through a densitometer

in the way Dr. Schraer

and others have done, you can see this peak for the

marrow

cavity.

It starts abruptly.

It goes up to a

point and it comes down to the other can measure it on a tracing.

side, and you

Dr. TROTTER. It is about 5 or 6% error and is prob-

ably not any better or worse than what

earlier.

It is at least that much error.

we heard

Dr. NORDIN. Yes, I should think it might well be 5%

but no one is going to start drawing

5% changes

in these measurements.

conclusions

from

The changes we

see are far bigger figures than we are concerned

with

here. When we talk about a fall in metacarpal

tical thickness

with age, we are talking about

cordiffer-

ences of 50%.

The fact that our lines can be superimposed

on Dr.

Garn's is an indication

that this is an extraordinarily

simple and precise

method.

Dr. ROCKOFE. I believe

that if you take a large

enough series or two groups and get cross sections,

will get lines that superimpose,

but that is not

question

we are talking about.

I think the question

you the
is

precision.

I have used a scaled down approach

to

densitometry

as an attempt at a tool for mensuration.

It is exceedingly

difficult.

I think the comment

is

pertinent

about how wide

a radiograph,

whether it

I think that this variance

the area of uncertainty

is on

is the eye or a densitometer.

is wide.

Dr. NORDIN. I honestly

do not agree with you. Of

all the measurements

that are fairly simple, measuring

cortical

thickness

is one. I am simply

to accept the idea that this is as difficult

not prepared as you think.

I am quite prepared at that.

to accept a 5% error ; let's leave it

Dr. RICH. It seems to me that your tomography

technique

will obscure, might make it hard for you to

CORTICAL

BONE VOLUME

AND LUMBAR SPINE DENSITY _

29

visualize,

loops of bowel with gas. On the other hand,

they still would contribute

something

to the density.

Dr. NORDLW. Yes, you are absolutely

right.

One of

the biggest technical

difficulties

of the advantages

of tomography

is gas bubbles, and one is that it smears the

gas bubbles over the whole situation--discs

and bodies ;

by the nature of the technique,

it smears it over. I

agree.

We have not solved the problem of getting rid

of patients'

gas bubbles.

If anyone can tell me how to

do it, I will be most grateful. Dr. LEVY. What interested

me most was your con-

trast on sequential

vertebral

densities.

examinations

of your relative

Can you tell us roughly what the

greatest

contrast

was in normal

adults

between

sequential

examination,

and then would

on why there was a difference?

you speculate

Dr. NORD_. Do you mean what is the error?

The

examinations

are made within a month, and I think

within a month they must be called error.

They very

greatest difference you of the method

is quite substantial.

May I remind

of calculation,

which gives a scale

of zero, where the vertebrae

and intervertebral

discs

are of apparently

equal density ? If these heights are

equal, the result we get is zero.

I want to make it quite clear that I think this theory

of value is an artifact.

I do not believe that this

means that the zero on our figure means our discs and

bones are, in fact, of equal density.

tomography,

and it is an artifact

It is an artifact of

of calculation.

The

artifact of tomography

arises from the fact that you

tend to smear the end plate more over the intervertebral disc, which is narrower, than you do over the body,

which is wider.

You have a certain

spreading

of

density of this end plate, and it affects the disc more

than the body.

That tends to equalize

their apparent

densities.

The second thing i_ that the disc tends to

be triangular

in shape, if I again may idealize;

the

body tends to be rectangular.

If you measure

your

height width,

by counting all the squares and dividing by the

then you are unfairly

reducing the height of the

disc relative

to the body.

There negative

are two reasons why we tend to get a lot of

values.

I do not think this is of any impor-

tance, because our technique

is essentially

one, and it is essentially another.

a relationship

an empirical of one thing to

We are not trying to measure

absolute density, and

I want to make it clear that a zero value merely mean_ that the standard and the spine are of the same relative

density.

Dr. ROCKOFF. I wonder if there is not some other

artifact

in the technique_

from this standpoint.

The

reason larger

that the intervertebral

disc, for instance, gets

and the vertebral

body gets smaller is that

the intervertebral

disc is exerting an outward force

on the vertebral body. I am sure that there is a dis-

tribution

of the forces that an intervertebral

disc is

capable of exerting.

When a vertebral body collapses,

while it might have had a certain optical density as it

collapsed,

this will appear within a short segment as

if there is more calcium

present.

I wonder

are not some other mechanical

artifacts.

if there

Dr. NoRms. As far as your first point is concerned, I should have added that one of the reasons that we

chose this method of calculation

is because it brings

out the process that takes place in osteoporosis.

The intervertebral

discs expand

into the vertebral

body. The vertebral

bodies get narrower,

the inter-

vertebral

discs get wider, the relating

heights change.

Therefore,

if you do your calculations

by dividing the

number of squares by this width, you have a c_tlcula-

tion which brings out the osteoporotic

processes,

both

from the densitometric

point of view and from the

morphological

point of view. This does not apply to

any of my normal

data, because

that normal series

does not include any cases regarded

as pathological

biconcavity.

With regard to compression

fractures,

I agree with

this entirely.

Whereas

a traumatic

fracture

will give

you an increase

in the density of the vertebral

body

which is fractured,

an o_eoporotic

fracture collapses

because there is a loss of bone within it. Therefore,

although you may not get such a low density as you

would expect in that vertebral body if it was not col-

lapsed, you would not expect to get an increased

den-

sity, because it is collapsing

because of loss of bone.

Dr. SMrrH.

I think we may be in error in assum-

ing that when you have fish-mouthing

and biconcavity

that there is a density increase which is just due to,

let's say, microcompression.

There is some evidence

that this may be an internal remodeling

in the verte-

bral body at a constant

density in adjusting

to the

forces exerted

by the intervertebral

disc; therefore

the density might not necessarily

increase with bicon-

cavity.

Dr. NORDII_. This could be one of the reasons why

most eases with biconcavity

do not necessarily

have

as low a density as you expect.

I do not w_nt you to

think all the patients

with biconcavity

have a normal

density.

There

cavity and with

high, density.

Dr. ROCKOFF.

are interesting quite normal,
I think it is

exceptions

with bicon-

and occasionally

even

apparent

that by sub-

tracting the way you are doing, you are assuming that

the relationship

between

the density on the film and

the calcium

or the mineral

content is a linear one.

You are assuming

that X amount of calcium is lost,

Y amount of change in density is occurring,

and this

relative relationship

will apply no matter where you

are on the calcium loss curve.

Dr. NORDIN. Yes, I think you

right in saying we were assuming

to express have not.

something

in milligrams

would be absolutely that, if I had tried of calcium, but I

Dr. ROCKOFF. We are assuming

it by subtraction.

Dr. WHereON. You have

ematically,

though,

ment or not.

whether

the same implication

math-

you give it a unit measure-

d

30

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

Dr. NORDIN. What you are saying is that th.e position

of this in terms of the meaning

of this subtraction

will be given on different

points of the scale.

Dr. V('HEDO._'. Yes. That is exactly it.

Dr. NORDIN. I must agree with you entirely

on this,

and we are trying at the moment to devise a method

with an ahuninum

standard

that would get around

it. If we keep within that kilovoltage

range where

the disc body ratio is constant,

we are reasonably

safe, but I am sure in precise terms that you are right.

I)r. GAR._. The Joyce Loebel response is not quite log

linear with respect to a linear wedge, so that the high

peak is much more than additively

higher than a lower

peak. Dr. NORDIN. Although
scan from Joyce Loebel.

I am now using the chromothe work on which this paper

was based was done on a Lawrence

Lockhart

densi-

tometer, linear

which converts

function.

You

from have

a log function

into a

the same

difference,

wherever Lawrence

you are Lockhart.

on an absolute

scale, on the

This is not true of the Joyce LoebeI nmchine.

The

position where you are in absolute density affects the

difference

on the Joyce Loel)el.

We are trying now

to introduce

SOlncthing

like an aluminum

standard

to

take (.are of that.

Dr. WHEDO._ *. I have a different

question.

Why

have people selected

L-3 as the choice vertebrae

to

examine?

In my clinical

experience,

which is not

extensive,

I see more fractures

occur along the spine

from about thoracic-8

to lumbar-2

or 3, with the most

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

frequent

occurrence

between

T-10 to L-1.

Why did

you and Dr. Vose also pick L--37

Dr. NORDIN. We were not looking for nonfracture.

Dr. _VHEDON. Yes, but the area I have mentioned

is

where occurs,
Dr.

the greatest

degree of change in mineral

above L-3, as evidenced

by fracture.

NORDIN. We were entirely

concerned

density with get-

ting the vertebral

body that was best centered

for a

measure

of bieoncavity.

With tomography,

it does

not really nmtter, but before tomography

it mattered

a tremendous

amount.

If you want to be right in the

middle of this beam, and if you take a picture on the

lumbar spine, L--3 will normally

be in the middle.

Now, you can ask the radiographer

to start taking

pictures at the thoracolumbar

junction,

but the normal

lumbar spine picture will be centered

at L-3, and that

is the reason we chose it.

Dr. STRANDJORD. Biconcavity

occurs clinically

far

more commonly anterior wedging,

in the lmnhar

region,

is in the thoracic.

but wedging,

Dr. NORDL'ó. That is right, because of the shape of

the spine.

Dr. _VHED0_'. This is quite true, but I suspect that if one were to look at a large series of films, one would

see more compression

fractures

at an area above L-3.

Dr. Vosz. We selected

L-3 instead

of the thoracic

vertebrae

because of the ribs.

Overlapping

ribs make

it very difficult to get densitometry.

In addition,

we

selected

L-3 because

it is the easiest

to obtain

in

autopsy.

Dr. NORDIN. That is a good reason.

//
7?

i '

Radiographic Bone
Densitometry

PAULINE BEERY MaCK Nelda Childers Stark Laboratory Texas Woman's University

Beginning in 19"27, various colleagues and I

developed a series of instruments desiglmd to

measure bone mass and density. The evolution-

ary progress leading to our present instrumen-

tation is described in the open literature.

At Texas Woman's University

we recon-

structed a Model IV while working on a new

plan for a bone density computer, which was

designed and built from 1954 to 1957 with the

cooperation

of physicists at the Leeds and

Northrup Company, Philadelphia

(primarily

the late James Donald Nelson).

Bone Densi-

tometer Assembly VI r'as described by Nelson

et al. (1958) and by Mack et al. (1959).

INSTRUMENTATION

OF CURRENTLY

USED BONE DENSITOMETER

ASSEMBLY

Assembly VI currently used in our bone mass

measurements at the Texas Woman's University

is a special purpose analog computer consisting

of an electromechanical

servomechanism

and

an integrating unit. The major units of the in-

strumentation

used in evaluating

the radio-

graphs in these laboratories are shown in fig-

ure 1. The equipment consists of five major

subassemblies,

all designed to operate together

as a completely integrated system. The basic

units of the overall assembly are the following:

(a) A modified Knorr-Albers

scanning

unit (unit at right of the figure) ;

(b) A Speedomax Model G transmitting

recorder (unit in center of the figure) ;

(c) A series of .20 potentiometers

in the

same panel as (b) ;

(d) A Speedomax Model G recording potentiometer; and
(e) An Instron integrator.

Figure "2 consists of a schematic diagram of

the integrated microdensitometer

system. Fol-

lowing this diagram, a signal is given by the

scamfing refit which is received by the first

recorder as an uncorrected trace of a wedge on

the radiograph being scanned. An adjustable slidewire is mounted in this recorder, which

serves as a function generator, tapped at 21

points to give "20 sections of equal length.

Twenty potentiometers

are associated with the

20 sections of the slidewire to permit manual

adjustment for purposes of correcting the first,

wedge trace. After the function generator has

been adjusted, the circuit setting is transferred

to the receiving recorder, tlms permitting

a

corrected wedge scan as r'ell as a corrected bone

scan to be received and displayed on this re-

corder. The bone trace gives a readout count

on the integrator.

Scanning Unit
The scanning unit consists of an optical system, a plate stage, a drive mechanism for the plate stage, and a d-c amplifier for the recorder. The optical system includes a special tungsten lamp with plane optically polished windows, powered from a highly stabilized power pack having a constancy of output with 0.1% for a-c line voltages between 100-1.25 volts at freguencies between 55 and 65 cycles. The beam from this lamp is focused on a photocell after
31

32

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

..

I

i
FIGUR1E.-Bone Densitometer Assembly V I currently used at the Texas Woman's University. Right: Densitometer. Center: Transmitting recorder with potentiometers for correcting calibration wedge trace in lower part of panel. Left:Recording potentiometer with Instron integrator in lower part of panel.

passing through the X-ray plate being scanned. The film is mounted on the plate stage that is supported by ball-bearing rollers on a carriage rod, all accurately machined to very close tolerance.
The drive mechanism for the plate stage has nine selectable speeds, varying from 0.1 mm per minute to 50 mm per minute. Each plate travel speed is regulated closely by a synchronous motor drive; and adjustable limit switches govern the limit of travel in either direction, as the plate travel is conveniently reversible by means of a switch.
A scale, mounted on the scanning unit and calibrated in millimeters, subdivided by a ver-

nier, indicates plate travel and enables the operator to scan a number of precisely equal segments of the film trace. This scale also permits the operator to retrace exactly the same length of film on repeated scans and serves as the guide for integrating the equal trace segments. The plate travel is synchronized with recording chart travel to insure that quantitative measurements of density can be produced and reproduced accurately. A precision d-c amplifier with stabilized zero and stabilized gain multiplies the minute current from the photocell to a value measurable by a self-balancing potentiometer recorder. A switch on the scanning unit increases the amplificationfivefold when needed.

RADIOGRAPI_LIC

BONE DENSITOMETRY

33

i

I

I

!

i

!

J

iT

t

I

I AMPLIFIER

s,GN.L.MPL,FI,E.

MICROPHOTOMETER

I

RECORDER

MEASURING CIRCUIT I

RETRANSMITTING

ADJUSTABLE

SLIDEWIRE

I I RECEIV, NG

] INTEGRATOR I

FIomm 2.--Schematic

diagram of the integrated

First Recorder

The first recorder (center unit in fig. 1) con-

sists of a Speedomax Type G self-balancing

functioning

recorder having adjustable

zero,

adjustable span, and a full scale balancing speed of less than one second. This recorder indicates

continuously

the magnitude of the amplified

photocell current and traces a graph on its chart

in synchronism travel.

with the scanning unit plate

A major feature of the complete assembly

consists of a special d-c retransmitting

slide-

wire mounted in this Speedomax self-balancing

potentiometer

recorder, with a moving contact

on this slidewire driven in synchronism with the

recording pen in an indicating pointer.

This

retransmitting

slidewire is divided very pre-

cisely into 20 equal segments, each segment

being shunted by an adjustable ten-turn po-

tentiometer.

An adjustable d-c voltage is im-

pressed across the total slidewire; and the out-

put of the slidewire is characterized

by adjust-

ing the 20 potentiometer dials to provide a cali-

brated output from this slidewire from the

trace of the reference wedge.

The corder tervals,

uncorrected wedge trace on the first re-

is scaled by the operator at 20 equal in-

using a special transparent

rule cali-

brated to provide direct setability of a calibra-

densitometric

system illustrated

in figure 1.

tion factor on tim one thousand division dials

of the 20 potentiometers. Since the scale of the first recorder is deter-

mined by the percentage of transmitted

light

and the calibrating

retransmitting

slidewire

corrects the scale of the second recorder to stand-

ard wedge density, producing a straight line trace of the calibrating wedge in conformity

with the wedge slope, the X-ray absorpt.ion as indicated by its densitometer trace on the second recorder is related directly to the X-ray absorption of the standard wedge.

Second Recorder

The second recorder receives, displays, and

records the signal from the special calibrating

retransmitting

slidewire which serves as a func-

tion transformer,

providing a line graph of the

reference wedge and a calibrated density trace

of the bone sample. Its graph also is syn-

cbronized with the automatic scanning.

A re-

transmitting

potentiometer

is driven from the

output shaft of this second recorder and actu-

ates an Instron integrator the base of this unit.

which is located in

Instron Integrator
The integrator provides a digital readout proportional to the area under the calibrated den-

34

UEVELOYMENT 01' METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

sitometer trace of the bone section which has

P

been scanned on the second recorder. The inte-

grator is equipped with two digital counter

readouts. One is reset after each segment is

integrated, if a sectional trace is segmented,

while the second readout acts as a continuous

counter, providing a totalized check on the read-

ings taken from the first counts. A bell actu-

ated by the limit switch on the plate travel

mechanism signals the operator that the desired

scan travel has been completed, and the inte-

grator counting is stopped a t this point.

SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS IN MAKING A BONE MASS DETERMINATION
To obtain a satisfactory calibration for a trace of a bone section from an X-ray film, the fundamental step is provided in the use of a calibration wedge on the same film as the bone image, as shown in figure 3. The wedge is made of an aluminum alloy, as noted, with X-ray absorption characteristics similar to that of bone. The wedge used on an os calcis trace, which is traced from its beginning to a distance of 13 cm along the base, has a slope of 1 :10 and thus provides a linear calibration unit from 0 to 1.3 cm of aluminum alloy wedge equivalency. The range of film density for an os calcis in normal adult males corresponds to the film density along 50 to 80% of the wedge length.
The initial record obtained on the first recorder from scanning the wedge with the densitometer without correction provides the h i s f o r calibrating the wedge curve for the film. Represented in this tracing is the percent light transmission through the film for displacement along the iyedge from the beginning to 13 cm out on the wedge trace. The shape of this uncorrected curve is influenced by many factors inherent in the film itself, the film exposure, and the film processing technique.
It is desirable to integrate the equivalent area under a tracing obtained across a line on a bone X-ray to provide an expression of equivalent bone mass for a given film. Since the roentgenographic process distorts a linear graph which would represent the wedge accurately, the units of light transmission must be Calibrated to equivalent wedge thickness before in-

FIGURE3.-Radiograph showing lateral view of human adult male subject, with the image of the os calcis
calibrating wedge on the radiograph. The line r e p resents "conventional" posterio-anterior trace made for purpose of measuring bone mass in this central
. section
Note.-Other parallel traces may be made the distance apart of the Densitometer scanning beam above and/or below the trace which i s illustrated, in order to measure the bone mass of a wide band in this bone,
tegration of the area under the tracing of a bone, if the results of the latter are to be correct This calibration procedure is provided through an electromechanical servomechanism which uses the wedge trace to provide calibrat'ion factors over 20 segments of the wedge trace, thus providing accuracy in the latter and the basis for accuracy in the subsequent bone trace.
The sequence of operations needed to achieve calibration of a density curve and to integrate the area under the curve of a bone on the same radiograph follows.
(a) The wedge roentgenographic image first is scanned for the purpose of providing the density calibration curve of that film on the first recorder. Before this, the first recorder is balanced to zero for the "no light transmission" condition obtained by inserting an opaque ob-

RADIOGRAPHIC

BONE DENSITO3dETRY

35

ject between the light source and the photo cell. Full scale output of the recorder is obtained for

the light transmission

13 cm out on the wedge

trace by adjusting the light source voltage and/

or the amplifier gain.

Once this adjustment is made_ it remains the

same throughout the rest of the procedure.

In

this manner, the extreme limits of the wedge are

set the same for each procedure. The use of a

site on the wedge other than 13 cm out the base

would require corresponding

changes in the

multiplication

factor for converting integrator

units to equivalent wedge mass. The uncor-

rected curve for the wedge then is traced on the first recorder.

(b) Then the teclmologist measures the curve

at 20 points along the chart and sets the 20

potentiometers

in the panel associated, respec-

tively, with each of the points to provide a calibration correction factor for each of the 20 divi-

sions. The current through the slidewire and

its shunted potentiometers

then is set to give

full scale deflection of the second recorder for

the zero light transmission

for transmission

13 cm out the wedge.

The retransmitting

slidewire is mechanically

coupled to the first recorder tracing which is

proportional

to the electrical inputs. In this

manner, a calibration factor is applied by each

potentiometer

according to the reading of the

first recorder, so that the output can be used

to drive the second recorder to display a cali-

brated output curve.

(c) When the potentiometers

are given the

settings required to obtain the needed resistance

for calibrating the original wedge trace, a re-

trace of the wedge is made on the second re-

corder. If the potentiometers

have been ad-

justed correctly, obtained.

a uniformly

straight graph is

(d) After the second recording potentiom-

eter has recorded the signal from the special

transmitting

slidewire and has received and dis-

played the corrected wedge trace, a calibrated

density trace is made of a section of a bone on

tile same film as the calibration wedge image.

This bone trace, also displayed on the second

recorder panel, is synchronized

with the auto-

matic scanning system.

Since the scale of the first recorder is linear

with the percentage of transmitted

light and

since the calibration procedure has corrected

the scale of the second recorder to standard

wedge density, the X-ray absorption by the bone section as indicated by its densitometer trace is related directly to the X-ray absorption by the standard wedge.

(e) A retransmitting

potentiometer

is driven

mechanically from the output shaft of this second recorder which actuates the Instron elec-

tronic integrator,

providing a digital readout

proportional

to the area under the calibrated

densitometer bone section trace, as noted.

CONVERSION OF INTEGRATOR UNITS

OF RESULTS COUNTS

IN TERMS TO OTHER

The counts secured from the integrator may

be used directly from one bone mass evaluation to another, since a conversion of integrator counts to another factor such as equivalent wedge volume or equivalent wedge mass would involve the use of the same conversion factor

for each set of counts, thus resulting in the same

percentage change from a radiograph

of one

subject made at one time to that made at sub-

sequent times. On the other hand, the counts can be converted readily by a mathematical formula to equivalent wedge volume and thence to equivalent wedge mass, the latter because the density of the aluminum alloy wedge is known.

The aluminum alloy wedge has been used to

calibrate calcium compounds which are com-

ponents of, or are associated with, bone mineral.

The calibrations

have been made by placing

chemically pure calcium compounds, or mix-

tures of compounds of known weight, in plastic encasements and exposing them on the same film as the standard wedge. The wedge image and the image of the chemical compound then can be traced in their entirety with parallel crosswise scans running the length of each

image. As a result of such a calibration

we some-

times report bone mass data of living subjects

in terms of "calcium hydroxyapatite

equival-

ency." The reporting of bone mass in such a term is not intended to denote that the bone

36

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

under consideration contains this amount of calcium hydroxyapatite but that the substances in the portion of the X-ray which was evaluated had an X-ray absorption value equivalent to the designated quantity of this calcium complex. The materials present in living bone and underand over-lying tissue include bone mineral, protein, water, and fat. The respective contributions of the separate substances to the mass absorption coefficient of the entire bone tissue are dependent upon the exposure energy applied to the bone.
Figure 4 shows the relationship of the X-ray determined mass of 50 ashed bones to the mass
of the ashed bones as determined analytically, which is linear. The bones ranged from those of a weanling rat to those of human subjects, as well as those of large farm animals. The bone ash in each case was traced in slices which
were the thickness of the scanning beam through the entire length. The results are reported as mass of bone ash in terms of calcium hydroxyapatite, the latter having been calibrated against the alloy wedge exposed on the same film.

SELECTION OF TRACING BONE MASS EVALUATIONS

PATHS FOR

Evaluation of the Os Calcis
It has been mentioned that the os calcis was
the first anatomical site to be chosen during the early period when a method was being sought to evaluate bone mass through the use of X-rays and when equipment for this purpose was being developed. The next bone to be added was the second phalanx from the distal end of the fifth digit. In the reports published from 1938 throught 1942, both of these sites were used in
arriving at conclusions concerning skeletal mineralization.
Somewhat later the patella was added, and these three anatomical sites have been those
chiefly used in our work to date. Two very important sites have been studied by my colleague, George Vose, namely, certain lumbar vertebrae
and the femur neck. He is reporting his progress with these two difficult locations separately.

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
Reason for Choice of Os Calcis.--The reasons for the selection of this bone were the following : (1) The os calcis is a large bone with a minimum of over- and underlying soft tissue, which has several advantages including the reduction of X-ray scattering. (2) This bone is easily accessible for X-raying. (3) This bone contains a large amount of cancellous or trabecular tissue. It is stated by Cantarow and Shepartz (1962) that interchange of ions between bone and extracellular fluid occurs more readily in newly formed trabecular bone than in older compact bone. (4) The foot is subjected to a

_' 17 _E
"ó[ 16 tic"
J5
IJJ 14 Z
om 13
z 12
II
z9
I.L
o7
_6
_5

/
/
//

░_ 'Ė i
/Oo o /
/

_3
_2

"_ 0 I , i 1 J i , * _ t , i i
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 I011 121314151617181920212225

EQUIVALENT

X-RAY MASS IN GRAMS

FIGURE 4.--Linear

relationship

of the X-ray deter-

mined mass of 50 ashed bones of a wide variety of

weights to the analytically

determined

mass in terms

of calcium sion factor

hydroxyapatite. was used :

Equivalent

Wedge Mass=

The following

conver-

S.L.V.tt.C. _

(cm*) D

Where S----Slope of wedge (cm/cm);

L=Baseline

length of wedge portion traced

of scan (cm/min);

H=Vertical

scanning

slit (cm);

K=Counts

(cm) ; V=Velocity

dimension

of the

obtained

for one

minute of full scale integration

Integrator

counts; and D=Density

loy wedge.

(counts/rain)

; C---

of aluminum

al-

Note.--Hydroxyapatite

powder packed tightly into

a plastic encasement

had a density 1.075 times that

of the aluminum

alloy wedge.

..

RADIOGRAPHIC BOXE DENSITOMETRY

37

great deal of mechanical stress with normal activity, and therefore it is likely to show differences in bone mass in persons who differ markedly in their level of activity or in one person while active and again while immobile. (5) The os calcis in the adult has two distinct anatomical landmarks which can be located without difficulty and which serve to mark the extremes of tracing paths which are valuable both in mass studies in which various populations are compnrPrl nr in ~ m g k ~ istxiid. i~e klvolring one p u p of humans beings evaluated repeated times.
Figure 3 shows a radiograph of a lateral view of an os calcis with the calibration wedge in place. The calibration wedge shown in this illustration consists of the aluminum alloy described above. I t is machined with a 10 : l slope, dereloped specificallj for this anatomical site. The line d r a m in this figure shows the 10cation of a scan which we have called our "conventional" os calcis tracing path. This represents a section of bone from a posterior to an anterior landmark 1.3 mm wide, the width of the scanning beam.
I n making scans of the conventional tracing path in successivefilms of one subject, pricks are made with a steel needle at the extremities of this path. but outpide the bone, with a ne-x film carefully superimposed over the original film. The same superimposition of wedge film over wedge film also is made in order to insure that the same path of the calibration wedge is traced from one time to another.
I n figure 5, the cross-sectional 1-iex of the
os calcis through which this scan has been traced i R dirided into 10 se,ments from the posterior to the anterior end of the bone. These dirisions are possible because the densitometer can be stopped at desired intervals, as mentioned in the description of the instrumentation, x i t h the integrator counts giI-en for each segment. This segmentation procedure enables changes in bone mass to be recorded in posterior segments of this bone where the skeletal tissues tend to be more dense, in central segments where there is a more lace-like configuration. or in the anterior segments.

j ihgfedcba
FIGLX5E.-Cross-section of os calcis through "conventional" manning path in radiograph illustrated in figure 3. hi{&?.-The Densitometer is stopped by the operator at interrals to obtain integrator readings on 10 segments of the total section. This enables observations to be made of bone mass changes in the various parts of this bone section.
I n order to find the bone mass of larger proportions of the os calcis, scans may be made 1.0 mni apart below and parallel to the conventional trace down to the bottom of the bone and abol*ethe conventional trace as far as possible without including any overlapping ankle bone.
So further view of the os calcis need be taken if bone mass is the factor to be measured. The entire bone. exclusive of bones which overlap the os calcis at the top. can be included in bone niaw measurements by means of the parallel traces described above on the lateral view which is taken. On the other hand. a band of any width can be measured by means of parallel scans across this bone parallel to the conventional scan.
Evaluation of Finger Phalanx 5-2
The middle phalanx in the fifth digit was selected as an anatomical site for evaluation because it represents a bone which contains a substantial amount of compact skeletal tissue and because it is easily accessible for radiographing. The selection of a single phalanx in the fifth digit n-as made because of the finding that the bone mass values of other phalanges in the same subject were closely correlated. Severtheless, in some longitudinal studies more

38

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

..

than one phalanx may be used, and a selected metacarpal as well as selected carpals may be evaluated also.
Evaluation of the Patella
The patella was selected for evaluation for bone mass because it contained both cortical and cancellous tissue and because it is easily accessiblefor X-raying.
Positioning of Subjects for the Three Radiographs
Subjects lie flat on their backs with a flat pillow under their heads for making exposures for the three bones-namely, os calcis, finger, and patella. They are covered entirely with leaded rubber sheeting except for the small part of the anatomy being X-rayed.
The X-ray of the hand is taken while the subject is flat on his back. Then he is turned slightly to his left to position the left os calcis and still further left to position the left patella.
All three radiographs are exposed in cardboard holders using Kodak Industrial AA film, which is a very fine grain film.

RECORDING DENSITOMETER
CAPABILITY
Figure 6 shows the positive of a radiograph in which a piece of heavy lead sheeting was placed over a part of the os calcis when the film was taken. The purpose of this figure is to show the range of the recording capability of the Bone Densitometer Assembly. I n making the traces of this film, a setting range mas established from zero for no light transmission to 9.5 for the maximum light transmission, the latter represented by the area covered by lead.
The aluminum alloy wedge is scanned in its characteristic manner, with the noncorrected raw scan shown in the figure. This wedge trace does not extend over the full scale because the full scale instrument deflection was set up so as to represent the absorption shown by lead.
The bone trace is interrupted when the tracing goes from the bone to the superimposed lead. The difference between the top of the wedge scan and the trace a t the position market lead on the figure shows the amount of silver which still is on the film and active ; and this represents the broad capability of the recording densitometer.

I

i

4

1 3 O~UT O~ N W E D G E

SCALE 0 : N O L I G H T

'

TRANSWSSION ~

Q5:UUiT TRANS. ~
MISSICN AT S I T E '
O f LEA0

'\'\ SCAW O f WEDGE

1

WEDGE
FIGUR6E.-Positive of a radiograph in which a piece of heavy lead impregnated sheeting has been placed over a part of the os calcis of mi adult male subject, showing the capability of the recording densitonieter ill use a t the Texas Woman's University.

RADIOGRAP]_IIC

BOb'E

DENSITOMrETRY

39

SELECTION

OF RADIOG1L4PHIC

EX-

POSURE CONDITIONS

The X-ray film exposure conditions were se-

lected so that the bone and wedge X-ray images

would fall as nearly as possible on the compara-

tively straight central portion of the Hurter

and Driffield characteristic

curve for X-ray

photographic

film.

Influence of Exposure Time

The influence of exposure time on the shape

of the noncorrected scan of the 10:1 wedge was

studied with kilovoltage held constant at 60 and

milliamperage

constant at 100, with the results

shown in figure 7. It is realized that the curves

presented in this figure represent the total effect

of the X-ray exposure and the densitometer

process, although they give information equivalent to an "H and D" curve and are so called. In

this experiment,

the effects of four exposure

times on the shape of the wedge curve was

studied. (The wedge used was the same as that

with which an adult os calcis is X-rayed.)

The

exposure seconds.

times were 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.25 The two traces at the shorter times of

exposure showed fairly linear portions in the central part of the uncorrected curve.
As the exposure increased, however, the curve went to the right of the "H and D" curve, with the beginning of the wedge trace becoming progressively flatter. A time of 0.6 second, with the other exposure variables as indicated, was se]ected for the exposure of an os calcis of an adult male, because the uncorrected curve indicated that the position on the "H and D" curve was favorable and because the time of exposure was more compatible with the thickness of this bone than a shorter time.

For other reasons besides the position of the

uncorrected

wedge curve on the "H and D"

curve, it was deemed important to select a low

exposure energy for radiogTaphing

the os calcis,

which is the most frequently used anatomical

site. For example, it is desirable to minimize

X-ray changes due to protein. At higher ex-

posure energies a higher proportion of protein

is included in the X-ray image than at lower

energies. It has been demonstrated

in our bed

_'IGURE 7.--Influence

of exposure

os calcis

wedge

X-rayed

at

voltage

and milliamperage.

time constant

on uncorrected

levels

of kilo-

rest studies that nitrogen is excreted in the urine

along with calcium and phosphorus, as seen in

figure 8. Some of this could originate from the

interstitial protein in bone as well as from the

protein of surrounding

soft tissue. Karl-_'kke

Onmell (1957) showed that the mass absorp-

tion coefficient of calcium hydroxyapatite

at very

low exposure energies is 10 times that of pro-

tein, while the differential becomes progressively

less as exposure energies increase. At very high

exposures the mass absorption for this calcium

complex becomes almost as low as that for protein, fat, and water.

In order to take advantage of as much of

the flattened part of the "H and D" curve as

40

DEVELOPIVIENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOM-ETRY

Ę

)-
< C_

rr uJ n

Z

uJ

O

O

25

Pre B _ d

_--Res_--9

n-

JO DayBed

Resi__,

Recovery

Period

Z 20

m

>-
rr <
Z

r_ 105V._

U_
O
oi

< n- 0 O

, 20-23

26-20

2--5

0--11

14--17

21-_

2'?-30

2--$

t I'20

23"26

29-2

.%--

8

II--

14

17--;'1

;)_-27

._10- 2

5--8

DATE S

I1--11

11--14

FIGURE &--Diagram

of daily losses of urinary

and reconditioning

periods also shown.

and that as low X-ray exposure

dominant

in bone mass losses.

energies

nitrogen

during a 30-day bed rest period, with the preconditioning

This illustrates

the fact that protein

also is lost during bed rest

as possible

should be used in order for bone mineral

to be pre-

possible a somewhat higher exposure energy is needed for the 5 : I wedge used for thicker parts of the body.
Figure 9 shows a typical operating range on the Hurter and Driflleld curve for a 10 : 1 wedge using an optimum exposure for an os calcis.
A wedge with a 5:1 slope, however, which has been found to be more suitable for thicker
parts of the body, such as the lumbar spine and the neck of the femur, needs to cover a wider range of exposure than thinner body locations. Somewhat longer exposure times also are necessary for these anatomical sites. The most suitable part of the "H and D" curve for this wedge, therefore, has been found to be the central area between the lower and upper curves. Figure 10 shows a typical operating range for this wedge.

IMPORTANCE

OF EXTENT OF COLLI-

MATION OF X-RAY BEAM IN OBTAIN-

ING ACCURACY SULTS

OF BONE MASS RE-

Some of our calibration wedges, particularly those developed for the os calcis and the thicker parts of the human anatomy, are too long to cone the X-ray beam below 12 inches in diameter. The Videx Palmer Radiographic Collimator with which our machine is equipped permits a variety of diameters, with the 12inch diameter most commonly used, except for the finger and for certain anatomical sites for subhuman primates. For these latter sites, smaller diameters are used.
In order to test the accuracy of the results obtained with a calcium compound X-rayed at

..

RADIOGRAPHIC BOXE DEXSITOMETRY

41

40 inches abore the table: with a collimated diameter of 12 inches, a series of experiments have been conducted of which this is an example. The detailed results of the series will be presented when they are completed. Nine
A TYPICAL HURTER AND DRlFFlELD CHARACTERISTIC CURVE FOR X-RAY PHOTOGRAPHIC F I L M
t

>
tm
W z
n

2

1 TYPICAL OPERATING RANGE

Y

0

FOR A 1O:l WEDGE

f

01
a

Y

0 L
z

UCREASING EXPOSURE

FIGURE9.-Effwtire operating range for S-raxing a calibration wedge which has a 10 : 1 slope.

TYPICAL WERATING RANGE FOR A 521 WEDGE
u e D CURVE
INCREASING EXPOSURE
FIGCB1E0.-Effectire operating range for X-raying a calibration wedge which has a 5 : 1 slope.

F X ~ lElA.-Lateral rim of an X-ray positive of an adult human male's left 06 calcis together with the calibration wedge, within a collimated 12-inch circle which defines the X-ray beam. with the illuminated center spot marked on the os calcis.
small plastic tubes, of 12 mm inside diameter and 4.8 cm deep, were used. One tube remained empty while eight were filled Kith stepwise quantities of Baker's analyzed calcium hydroxide. Three arrangements of the tubes were X-rayed, as shown in figure 11.
Figure 11has four parts. Part A consists of a positire of a typical os calcis radiograph with the os calcis calibration wedge in its characteristic location. The illuminated center spot which coincides with the center of the X-ray beam is indicated by a small black spot. The radiograph of the os calcis and the accompanying wedge are used in this figure for purposes of comparing its position within the circle of radiation with the positions of the tubes of calcium hyroxide.
Part B of the %re shows the nine tubes randomly placed, with the tops up, on the one side of the calibration wedge. I n P a r t C, the tubes are arranged in a cluster approximately twice as f a r from the wedge as was the os calcis in its characteristic location. I n P a r t D, the cluster of tubes has been moved to a distance from the wedge which is approximatel? twice

42

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

..

\ \
\
1;

\

\

\

PART B

/'
/'

\- 1 PART C

FIGUR1E1B.-Xray positive of a series of plastic tubes, one of which was empty while the remainder were filled with stepwise quantities of calcium hydroxide. In this view they were arranged randomly on one side of the os calcis calibration wedge, in t h e center of the 12-inch collimated X-ray beam. T h e illuminated center spot of the beam is marked with a black spot.

FIGUR1E1C.-X-ray positive of the same series of plastic tubes arranged in a cluster inside the same 12inch circle but situated approximately twice as far from the calibration wedge as was the case with the os calcis i n 11A.

as f a r as the distance bGtween tubes and wedge in Part C. The black spot on Parts B, C, and D again represents the central illumination spot.
I n evaluating the quantity of calcium hydroxide in each of the plastic tubes the wedge on each of the three films was scanned on the first recorder of the Densitometer Assembly in the usual manner and then was corrected. Each of the tubes in each of the films was scanned for a distance of 5.0 mm in a portion of the tube where there was no effect from the sides of the containers, with the axis of scan oriented so that the values obtained came only from the calcium hydroxide and the bottom of the containers, with the latter negligible. The results
were obtained as integrator counts.
Figure 12 shows the comparative values ob-
tained in terms of integrator counts obtained from the calcium hydroxide in the tubes in Parts B, C, and D, respectively, as the stepwise quantities of calcium hydroxide increased. Part B

FIGUREllD.-X-ray positive of the same series of plastic tubes arranged in a cluster inside the same 12-inch circle but situated approximately twice as f a r from the calibration wedge as they were in 11C.

..

RADIOGRAPHIC BOPIT DESSITOMETRY

43

6oor----COMPARISON OF EVALUATZOA'S OF

r

CALCIUM HYDROXIDE BASED ON UN-

CORRECTED AND CORRECTED TRACES

OF THE CALIBRATION WEDGE

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

8

PLASTIC CYLINDERS WITH STEP-WISE INCREASES IN

WEIGHT OF Ca(OHI2

FIGUR1E2.-This graph shows the relationship of step wise quantities of calcium hydroxide in plartic tubes a s measured on a quantitative balance and as evaluated by t h e densitometer i n terms of integrator counts. The relationship is shown to be linear for the arrangements in P a r t B (dots) and in P a r t C (x's). For P a r t D this relationship is sporadic, showing that there is a limit to the placement of substances to be eraluated densitometrically if accurate results are to be obtained.

shows that the graph representing integrator counts and quantities of the calcium compound was linear when the tubes were grouped along one side of the wedge. Likewise, the clustered tubes approximatelg twice as far from the wedge as the os calcis showed linearity with respect to the two factors undergoing comparison.
The group of tubes were situated so f a r from the wedge that the wedge itself could not have been placed close at hand and still fall within the 12-inch diameter circle.
These findings showed that the placement of an os calcis properly situated with respect to the calibration wedge within a collimated beam 12 inches in diameter could give accurate results. I n fact, if it were farther from the wedge than it is customarily placed, accurate results still
- could be expected. A limit far beyond any
locations which we use, however, was found in the case of the third part of the experiment.
792-955

Our wedges have been calibrated many times again& pure chemicals which are known to be a part of bone mineral. I n these calibrations we have used our o m technique, correcting the raw. uncorrected wedge curve by the method described earlier in this report as the first step in our densitometric e-raluation procedure, and then correcting the raw trace before proceeding.
I n order to find whether or not the same results would hare been obtained if the raw, uncorrected curye had been used without correction, the folloTnng experiment has been performed.
Sine small plastic cylindrical containers of the type used for the abore experiment were used in this experiment. They were found to absorb only small amounts of X-rag and not to differ front each other in this respect. They were filled with different stepwise amounts of calcium hydroxide than were used abore. The first tube remained empty. The second tube contained 0.129 gram of the compound, with each succeeding tube increased by this amount. Figure 13 shows the radiograph of the nine tubes arranged in random order on the two sides of the calibration wedge. The tubes and wedge were X-rayed a t a tube distance of 40 inches, a t 60 kV, 100 mA, and 0.4 second.
FIGCR1E3.-Positive of radiograph of nine plastic tubes of which eight contained stepwise amounts of calcium hydroxide arranged in random order on both sides of t h e os calcis calibration wedge, with the ninth tube empty.

44

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

The densitometric scans were made exactly 5.0 mm in length in the center of the tube image, with the results recorded as integrator counts.
Figure 14 shows two graphs based on weight of the calcium compound plotted against the integrator counts derived from the Densitom_ter. The graph marked with the x's shows the results obtained when the integrator counts were taken from the procedure in which the

500 1

I

,

,

i

i

i

,

i

t

/

/ ./

g

'j

200

,oo

eL_-: ,--':, , , , ;, , ,

0

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

PLASTIC

CYLINDERS

WITH STEP-WISE

INCREASES

IN

WEIGHT

OF Co(OH)?.

FIGURE 14.--This

figure includes

two graphs in which

the mass of each of a series of calcium hydroxide

samples in stepwise quantities

as determined

on an

analytical

balance

is plotted

against

integrator

counts derived from a densitometric

tracing,

tegrator being convertible

to mass by a simple

the inmathe-

matical formula.

The calcium

hydroxide

samples

were in small plastic tubes with one empty.

In the graph delineated

by dots, the calibrativn

wedge was traced on the first recorder

of the Den-

sitometer

Assembly,

then was corrected

by setting

the dials in the potentiometer

panel, and then was

retraced

on the second recorder

after which the

contents of each individual

tube were scanned.

In the second graph, defined by x's, the raw, un-

corrected correction

calibration

curve was traced,

but the

vf this trace was omitted before the cal-

cium hydroxide

samples in the tubes were scanned.

The fact that the plot based on densitometer

values

for the wedge which was corrected

is linear with

respect to the actual, weights of the calcium hydrox-

ide samples,

whereas

no linearity

exists between

analytical

balance determined

mass and densitom-

eter determined

integrator

counts convertible

to

mass illustrates

the importance

raw curve of the calibration

of correcting .wedge before

the mak-

ing an evaluation X-rays.

of mass densitometrically

from

IN BONE DENSSTOM'ETRY
initial, noncorrected wedge curve was used. When the wedge curve was corrected according to our procedure with the corrected wedge curve, which is used as a standard for our system, the plot represented by the dots was obtained.
The graph based on the corrected wedge curve gave a linear relationship between the integrator counts and the stepwise increase in weights of the calcium compound, while the data derived from the uncorrected wedge curve failed to give stepwise integrator counts for stepwise changes in weights of the calcium hydroxide.

REPRODUCIBILITY

OF BONE DENSI-

TOMETER TRACING TECHNIQUE

As a test of the reproducibility of the bone densitometer tracing technique which has been discussed in this report, eight films of Dr. Fred B. Vogt's heel bone were taken within a period of one-half hour. Dr. Vogt monitored the tracing of the films and the analysis of the data which are presented in table I.
The author positioned the subject and supervised the taking of the X-rays, as is done for all X-rays taken in this laboratory. The subject was required to get on and off the X-ray table and be repositioned for each film taken. After being located on the table, a positive of an os calcis film was placed under his foot over the X-ray film, which was encased in a cardboard holder. The purpose of the X-ray positive was to position the foot indentically for each film and to insure that the location of the wedge with reference to the os calcis remained the same each time an exposure was made. The positive was removed before the film was taken. This
procedure is followed in all longitudinal studies, with a subject's positive made from the first radiograph taken in a series.
The position of the X-ray tube and of the illuminated center spot which coincides with the center of the X-ray beam was adjusted for each film, with the center light spot made to coincide with the same place on the side of the foot with each repeated position.
The same exposure conditions were used for

- .,

RADIOGRAPHIC B0_'E DENsrroMETRy

a

"

45

TABLE L--Integrator for Each Film, with the Subject

_ounts Made of Eight Os Calcis Fgm8 Processed

and A naZ, yzed Three

with the Eight Films taken of the Sarae

Repositioned

between Film Ea_poturea

Subject

within

One-Half

Times Hour,

Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment

1 ........ 2 ........ 3 ........ 4 ........ 5 ........ 6 ........ 7 ........ 8 ........ 9 ........ 10 .......

Total .......

Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment

1 ........ 2 ........ 3 ........ 4 ........ 5 ........ 6 ........ 7 ........ 8 ........ 9 ........ 10 .......

Total ......

Segment 1........ Segment 2 ........ Segment3 ........ Segment 4 ........ Segment 5 ........ Segment 6 ........ Segment 7 ........ Segment 8 ........ Segment 9 ........ Segment 10 .......
Total ......

Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment

1 ........ 2 ........ 3 ........ 4 ........ 5 ........ 6 ........ 7 ........ 8 ........ 9 ........ 10 .......

Total .......

Fihn l
496 791 1037 1240 1287 1279 1232 1230 1265 1223
11080
Film 2 506 787
1034 1241 1280 1286 1222 1234 1271 1239

498 796 1041 1237 1281 12"75 1239 1226 1264 1231
11088
502 784 1039 1236 1294 1301 1229 1239 1269 1240

11100
Film3
501 783 1046 1254 1299 1286 1240 1237 1275 1228

11133
498 781 1053 1247 1283 1277 1242 1234 1265 1236

11149
Film4
507 800 1041 1260 1304 1295 1240 1249 1263 1237

11116
502 801 1041 1262 1291 1287 1243 1240 1260 1228

11196

11155

506 782 1041 1253 1302 1294 1240 1229 1254 1225
11126
497 787 1033 1234 1274 1281 1227 1235 1251 1255
11074
497 800 1041 1237 1291 1290 1231 1236 1258 1234
11115
502 804 1039 1237 1296 1301 1230 1236 1278 1250
11173

Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segmen_ Segment Segment Segment
Segment

1 ....... 2 ....... 3 ....... 4_ ...... 5 ....... 6 ....... 7 ....... 8 ....... 9 .......
10 ......

Film5
500 804 1053 1264 1311 1306 1241 1232 1265 1229

Total .....
Segment 1....... Segment 2 ....... Segment 3 ....... Segment 4 .... ,__ Segment 5....... Segment6 ....... Segment 7 ....... Segment8 ....... Segment 9 ....... Segment I0 ......

11205
Film
504 796 1048 1259 1301 1300 1247 1243 1270 1243

Total .....

Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment Segment

1 ....... 2 ....... 3 ....... 4 ....... 5 ....... 6 ....... ? ....... 8 ....... 9 ....... 10 ......

11211
Film7
503 803 1041 1241 1294 1291 1231 1229 1274 1244

Total .....
Segment 1....... Segment 2 ....... Segment3 ....... Segment 4 ....... Segment5 ....... Segment 6 ....... Segment 7 ....... Segment 8 ....... Segment 9 ....... Segment 10 ......

11151
Film8
496 797 1038 1236 1300 1294 1230 1240 1267 1228

Total .....

11126

501 799 1058 1269 1314 1394 1245 1238 1278 1236
11242
503 799 1051 1253 1290 1286 1245 1240 1266 1241
11174
503 810 1046 1244 1310 1300 1236 1233 1265 1241
11188
503 807 1029 1240 1304 1311 1232 1238 1275 1239
11178

502 800 1054 1239 1310 1306 1240 1243 1269 1249
11212
505 798 1051 1268 1310 1297 1245 1243 1278 1247
11242
502 806 1044 1243 1302 1297 1239 1231 1268 1234
11166
507 791 1058 1265 1314 1302 1239 1243 1275 1252
11246

m

46

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

each film--namely,

60 kV, 100 mA, and 0.6

second. All films were processed in the devel-

oper at the same time. The subject was protected during all exposures by lead shielding placed over his body, covering all areas except the foot, with the shielding replaced for each new positioning.

The results in the table represent the analysis

of the central section of the os calcis (see fig. 3).

The section was segmented as it was traced by

interrupting

the scan and taking an integrator

count for 10 separate segments in each bone

scan, as shown in the cross-sectional view

through which this scan is traced (see fig. 5). On each film the os calcis was analyzed three

separate times, with the film completely repositioned in the densitometer before each analysis,

and with the wedge scanned, the uncorrected

wedge trace corrected, and the proper section

of the bone scanned independently

for each

trial. The positions of the scan on os calcis

and on the wedge were located on each film by

needle pricks at the posterior-anterior

extre-

mities of the bone scan position, but outside of

the bone. The wedge extremities

were also

located in the same manner. Exact locations of

the landmarks for the scans were found for the

various films by superimposing

the films one at

a time on top of the initial film and locating the positions of the needle pricks from this first film.

Detailed statistical analysis of these data has

been prepared and is being presented elsewhere

for publication.

To give some evaluation of the

range of error that can be expected for the total process of taking the film, developing the film, and analyzing the film on the densitometer, an

analysis of variaaee was performed on the sums

of the counts for the segments for e_ch of the

IN BONE DENKITOMETRY

three analyses made on the eight films. The

data are presented in integrator couats.

The 99% confidence level is expressed in mean

densitometer

counts of 11,160, with a range of

counts above and below this mean approximat-

ing 0.75% of the total counts. Thus it could

be said that the "error" which is found between

the films as analyzed is represented at the 99% confidence level by a span or range of error of 0.75% above and below the mean for a total

range of 1.5%.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is deeply indebted to those who, through the years, have cooperated in the de-

velopment of equipment and the standardiza-

tion of method for the measurement

of bone

mass by the densitometric

scanning of X-rays.

Especial gratitude is due to Ernest Axman,

Hughes Daniel Trapp, W. Lewis Shelter, and

the late Walter N. Brown, Jr., for assistance in

the development of the earlier models of our

scanning densitometers,

and to George P. Vose

and the late James Donald Nelson and his col-

leagues at the Leeds and Northrup Company for

collaboration in the design and btfilding of the

Bone Densitometer Assembly which we are now

using.

Dr. Fred B. Vogt, a staff member of the Texas

Institute for Rehabilitation

and Research of the

Baylor University College of Medicine (Hous-

ton), has been most helpful during the past

21/_ years by serving as a consultant to our

group at the Texas Wom_n's University in our

NASA bed rest studies and, particularly,

by co-

operating in experiments validity of our radiographic procedures.

designed to test the bone densitometric

REFERENCES

CANTEROW,

ABRAHAM;

and SttEPARTZ,

BERNARD: Biochemistry,

Third ed., W. B. Saunders

Company, Philadelphia,

1962.

MACK, PAULINE BEERY ; VOSE, GEORGE P. ; and NELSON, JAMES DONALD : New Developments

in Equipment

for the Roentgenographic

Measurement

of Bone Density,

Am. J. Roent-

genol., Radium

Therapy,

Nucl. Meal., vol. 82, 1959, p. 303.

NELSON, JAMES DONALD; MACK, PAULINE BEERY; and VOSE, GEORGE P. : New Design of

a Linearizing

Recording

Densitometer.

ReD. St. Instr., vol. 20, 1958, p. 316.

OMNELL, KARL-/_KE: Quantitative

Roentgenologie

Studies on Changes in Mineral Content

of Bone in Vivo. Acta Radiol., Suppl. 148, 1957.

,q
i

Factors Affecting the Precision of Radiographic Densitometry
of the Lumbar Spine and Femoral Neck

GEoa_ P. Vos_. Nelda Childers Stark Laboratory Texas Woman's University

The increasing interest in the measurement of bone mineral content by X-ray or gamma-

ray absorptiometry

is clearly indicated by the

numerous investigations

currently

underway

involving

applications

of the various tevh-

niques. Since the science is not a new one, it is

perhaps surprising that it has not yet been de-

veloped to highest perfection.

Certainly far

more progress has been made in more formida-

ble technological

tasks.

Television, for ex-

ample: was developed to a reasonably good state

in less than three decades of experimentation,

and manned space vehicles were orbiting the

earth within a single decade of organized re-

search. On the other hand, although X-ray

utilization in the medical sciences is an old art

(scientists were experimenting

with quantita-

tive evaluations of skeletal density as early as

1897), we are still somewhat uncertain of its

ultimate capacity or even its present state of

development.

Since the earliest attempts with bone densi-

tometry, several methods have been developed

using both polychromatic

and monochromatic

beams with X-ray film detectors.

Recently,

monochromatic

photon absorptiometry

with

scintillation

detection has been applied in esti-

mating the ash content of certain bones of the

appendicular

skeleton. Admittedly,

the sub-

stitution of collimated monochromatic

beams

in X-ray and gamma-ray bone absorptiometry reduces both the scattering error and the range of effective mass absorption coefficients of the

component elements.

A chief disadvantage

of

the monochromatic

beam system, however, is

the accompanying decrease in intensity which

requires relatively long exposures even for such

relatively thin body parts as the wrist and hand.

Although appendicular

bone densitometry

is a useful investigative tool, its major disad-

vantage is that it may not be a sensitive reflector

of changes in the axial skeleton, which includes

areas most significantly

involved in osteo-

porosis and other metabolic skeletal disorders.

This disadvantage,

and the consequent inade-

quate application of appendicular densitometry,

probably accounts for the somewhat disappoint-

ing contribution

thus far of bone densitometry

to our knowledge of bone metabolism.

Al-

though X-ray densitometry of bones of the ex-

tremities is capable of good reproducibility

us-

Lag current methods, it may not be possible for any X-ray of gamma-ray absorption technique to detect the minute calcium accretion or resorp-

tion occurring during periods of one or two

weeks within a single bone of the appendicular

skeleton. It is well known, however, that bone

demineralization

can be detected visually at

earlier stages in the axial skeleton than in the

appendicular skeleton, and apart from the tech-

nical disadvantages,

the spine has long been con-

sidered the densitometric

area of choice. The

major technical problem that has hindered vertebral densitometry is the complexities resulting from the effects of the superimposed, large, and

variable amounts of surrounding soft tissue and

47

48

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

sometimes the .uonuni'form bowel contents on

the bone image. However, it is the cylindrical

vertebral column that is usually evaluated when

skeletal density is clinically assessed because it

is frequently in the spine where a decreased

mineral content first occurs, where the decrease

in mineral content is ultimately the greatest,

and where the consequences of decreased bone

tissue are clinically more significant.

This report provides the results of some in-

tensive experimentation

on the effects of nu-

merous radiographic

variables on densitometry

of the lumber spine and femoral neck. Possibly

the causes of inconsistencies among the earlier

studies by various investigators

using other

anatomical sites can be traced to some of the

effects described in this report. We are well

aware that some of our first attempts in ver-

tebral densitometry were handicapped by a lack

of knowledge of just how significant some of

the variants were. At the Lahey Foundation

in Boston, for example, an application of the

newest techniques is expected to clear up some

of the inconsistencies which were noted during

the earlier clinical applications.

The limits dictated by the numerous control-

ling factors are now clearly obvious. Hence,

the overall precision of radiographic

densitom-

etry should be increased if the limitations im-

posed by the factors studied in this investiga-

tion are adhered to rigidly.

GENERALIZED

TECHNIQUE

HUMAN

VERTEBRAL

AND

DENSITOMETRY

FOR FEMORAL

Although the methods applied in radio-

graphic femoral utilized skeleton,

densitometry

of the lumbar spine and

neck are essentially the same as those

in densitometry

of the appendicular

the increased masses of obscuring

tissue requires the rigid application of highly

standardized techniques.

In a strictly abbreviated presentation,

these

include the use of collimated beams, shielding the X-ray table, subject, and calibration stand-

ard with sheet lead and lead rubber to prevent "undercut" scattering, and precise application

of exposure and darkroom processing method-

IN BONE DENS_ITOMETRY

ology. The practice of exposing the body part

and calibration

wedge side-by-side

(as in ap-

pendicular bone densitometry)

has been modi-

fied. In the case of the femoral neck, the wedge

is placed on a scribed plastic shield overlying

the hip in such a way that the X-ray image of

the wedge is projected through the soft tissue

of the thigh immediately adjacent to the bone.

In densitometry of the lumbar spine, the beam

is first centered over vertebra L3, which is pro-

jected onto the top one-half of a 14 x 17-inch

film, and immediately thereafter centered upon

the aluminum-plexiglass

phantom, which is pro-

jected onto the bottom one-half of the film. In

all cases, replicate exposures are made in order

to detect possible energy variations between ex-

posures of bone and calibrating material.

The method requires the use of high speed

films and calibrated intensifying screens, recip-

rocating bucky diaphrams,

and rigid con-

sideration of all factors discussed in this report.

THEORETICAL

Part I. General

The theoretical aspects of absorptiometry

of

homogeneous materials are well known, so will

be dealt with only briefly in this report. If the

absorber consists of a single element (or group

of elements in constant proportionality

to pro-

vide a mean mass absorption coefficient) the

mass of material is proportional

to its absorb-

ance of an X-ray beam of known quality and

intensity. In the case of an absorber having two

components of widely different absor!_tion coefficients, the ratio of the two components can be

determined

from the X-ray attenuation,

pro-

viding either the total mass or volume of the absorber is known. Bone falls into this cate-

gory, since it is composed of two fractions--

mineral and water organic matrix--each

having

widely separated absorption coefficients.

"At an effective wavelength

of 0.413 A,

for example, the mass absorption coefficient

of the organic fraction of bone is approxi-

mately 1.30, while that of the inorganic

fraction is 14.8. At this wavelength,

there-

fore, the organic-inorganic

absorption ratio

Ę JpRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

(_/p)o/(g/p)l is 0.09. At a higher energy wavelength of 0.124 _ the ratio is 0.36. These data indicate that the mean absorption coefficient of bone will vary in accordance with the wavelength of X-radiation and the relative proportions of organic and inorganic fractious in the absorbing mas_ With the wavelength remaining constant, the organicinorganic ratio of the material then establishes its mean mass absorption coefficient.
To validate such an assumption_ it must be shown that variations in the ratios of the com-

ponent elements of the organic and _norganic fractions do not alter the absorption by each fraction as a whole. In this regard, the inorganic fraction of bone will first be cousidered-
Although the chemical structure of bone mineral is not completely understood, calcium and phosphorus obviously comprise its major absorbing elements, with the calcium to phosphorus ratio in bone generally accepted to vary from 1.5 to 2.0. To determine the change in transmittance accountable to varying ratios of calcium and phosphorus in the absorber, mixtures of calcium carbonate and CaH4(PO4)_" tt20 were prepared in such a way that the calcium-phosphorus ratio ranged from 0.64 to 3.16. Within these limits the transmittance of the

mixture (at 40 kV) was changed by less than

1%. Although any change in the Ca: P ratio

would be expected to have a more pronounced

effect than this on total absorption, the absorp-

tion accountable to the oxygen component of bone mineral tends to subordinate the effects of

such ratio changes since oxygen accounts for

approximately molecule.

50% of the weight of the

Variations in the relative proportions of the organic components have an even smaller effect upon the mean absorption coefficient. The organic fraction in dry bone contains between 90 and 96% collagen or collagen-like proteins, and a few percent of fat. In the case of a low energy X-ray beam, the absorption coefficient of fat is approximately 70% that of protein. Because the absorbing properties of protein and fat are so closely related, the expected variations in the relative quantities of these two components would be of no significance.

OF LUMBAR

SPINE AND FEMORAL

NECK

49

Part II. Soft Tissue Corrections
At the present time a few investigators are using two widely different wavelengths to separate the soft components from mineral in Xray densitometry. This approach, although theoretically sound, does not invalidate the use of either a single wavelength or a polychromatic beam. As shown in the previous section, the mass absorption coefficient of bone will vary in accordance with the effective wavelength of fine X-radiation and the relative proportions of organic and inorganic fractions. With the wavelength remaining constant, the inorganic/ water-organic ratio then establishes its mean mass absorption coefficient. For example, at an energy of 45 keV the mass absorption coefficients of hydroxyapatit_ protein, water, and fat are 0.74, 0.23, 0.24, and 0.22 respectively. Since the fat component of bone is fairly low, the average mass absorption coefficient of the bone is quite close to 0.23---which is significantly lower than the 0.74 of the mineral fraction. What we are
measuring with either a single wavelength or a polychromatie beam, therefore, is the weight concentration of bone mineral to its water-or-
ganic matrix. The foregoing statements are intended to de-
fend the validity of separating bone mineral from its soft fractions. In practice, however, the soft tissue overlying the bone is actually of greater significance than the soft tissue within the bone.
Various attempts have been made to correct for soft tissue absorption as a source of error in quantitative X-ray measurements. The current method used by the writer is essentially the exposure of a calibration wedge through the same thickness of tissue (or tissue-simulating plastic) as that overlying the bone itself. In the case of the femoral neck, the wedge is placed over the subject's hip in such a way that its image is projected beside the bone with approximately the same thickness of soft tissue complicating each image. In the case of the third lumbar vertebra the calibration wedge is exposed through a thickness of plexiglass plates equivalent to the lateral thickness of the patient. Admittedly, plexiglass does not have precisely the same X-ray absorption as all soft tissues,

5O

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSJTOMETRY

but the difference in each radiograph can be de-
I
termined by densitometric comparison of plexi-

glass and the soft tissue adjacent to the bone,

and the scan profile is either elevated or de-

pressed accordingly.

It is emphasized that on

followup ill, ms of the same subject it is necessary

to use the same number of plexiglass plates that

were used initially. In the case of the femoral neck, since individ-

ual musculature varies within short distances,

a similar wedge scan adjustment must be made on each densitometric scan of the bone.

THE ABSORPTION

STANDARD

In order to investigate

reproducibility

as

affected by radiographic

factors alone (uncom-

plicated by anatomical effects) it was first neces-

sary to construct a standard absorber from com-

ponents having similar X-ray scattering and

absorption characteristics

as bone and soft tis-

sue, and which could be positioned under the X-

ray beam in a reproducible manner.

The standard absorber simulating bone and

tissue used in these tests is illustrated in figure 1

and is essentially a machined 5: 1-slope alu-

minum alloy wedge embedded in a plexiglass

plate of 5.8-cm thickness.

The composition of

the alloy is 93.4% aluminum, 4.5% copper, 1.5%

magnesium, and 0.6% manganese.

Embedded

also in the plate and immediately

adjacent to

the wedge is a simulated "bone" composed of

40% human bone ash (575 ░ C) and 60% casein

to simulate the soft tissue component.

This

material is compressed into a 1.3-cm hole drilled

through the plate. In use, the absorber is

placed in the X-ray field with the central beam
projected at a point midway between the wedge and simulated bone. The total thickness of the

absorber can be varied by stacking additional plexiglass plates of 1.2-cm thickness each above and below the central plate containing the calibration wedge and bone ash. The entire assem-

bly is placed upon a 15 x 18-inch lead sheet (1/s-
inch thickness), having a rectangular section removed with dimensions somewhat smaller than

those of the plates. A rectangular is slipped down over the stacked plates to reduce undercut scattering possible.

lead sleeve plexiglass as much as

FIGURE L--Standard

absorber

used

tests consisting

of an aluminum

bone ash embedded in Plexiglas.

in the described alloy wedge and

The total thickness of plexiglass used in all

exposures made during these investigations

was

17.8 cm, with five plates being used above and

below the central plate.

Figure 2 shows the mass absorption coeffici-

ents of bone ash (considered to be hydroxyapa-

tire, Ca10(PO4)G" (OH)2), the aluminum alloy

standard, and the three soft components of bone.

It can be seen that the aluminum alloy used has

absorption

coefficients somewhat lower than

those of hydroxyapatite

throughout

range shown.

These absorption

the energy coefficients

could be brought alloy containing heavier elements. ray absorption

closer together by use of an

slightly more of one of the

This slight difference in X-

characteristics

between bone

mineral and the alloy, however, probably does not cause serious errors since the same kilovolt-

age is used on followup dividuals.

films of the same in-

KILOVOLTAGE

EFFECTS

Part I. General

Since the ratios of X-ray absorption coefficients between bone and soft tissue and between

bone and aluminum alloy change in accordance

with changes in the effective wavelength of the

beans, it is obvious that the kilovoltage must be

controlled rigidly in radiographic

bone densi-

tometry.

In addition, the kilovoltage

effect

Ę ░ PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

OF LUMBAR

SPINE AND FEMORAL

NECK

51

.J-)rm OF WATER, FAT, PROTEIN, HYDROXYAPATITE,

AND

Al-Cu-Mn- M 9 - ALLOY

4 -\\
E

H.A.

-

\

\\

\

\

ALLOY ,,.x\ " x\

\

xx

""

I

PROTE.I N

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

40

5O

6O

70

80

90

I00

II0

120

130

140

KVP

FtGU_ 2.--Mass

absorption

c__flicients

of hydroxyapatite,

aluminum

alloy, and three soft tissue components.

appears to be more pronounced when fluorescent screens are used than when nonscreen films

are exposed directly to the beam in cardboard

holders. Figure 3 illustrates that the X-ray

aluminum equivalency decreases as kv is in-

creased (with the MAS adjusted to maintain

constant film background

density).

Within

the 10-kV range from 56 to 66 the apparent

aluminum equivalency values ranged from 0.83

to 1.(D--a change of approximately

21%, or a

2% change per kilovolt.

Within a narrower

range of 58-62 kV the total error was 4.2%, or

about 1% per kilovolt.

Since it is known that

kV variations of 10% or more exist among dif-

ferent X-ray units, it is possible that aluminum

equivalency errors of 30% may occur when

one X-ray unit is substituted for another with-

out cross-calibration

compensation.

The fol-

lowing part of this section of the report de-

scribes a method of cross-calibration

which has

made it possible to reduce an initial error of

31% on an uncalibrated calibration.

unit to 1.7% after

At higher beam intensities the error accountable to kV variations is decreased. This effect is

illustrated by figure 4 showing a 10.2%/kV error at low MAS (80-125), a 5.2%fkV verror at in-

termediate MAS (150-250), a 3.0%/kV error at

high MAS (250-350), and a 1.4%/kV error at

the highest MAS of 350-500.

Although the reproductibility

is increased at

high M_AS, it is possible that the overall ac-

curacy is somewhat diminished in accordance

with decreased sensitivity in densitometry of

the darkest radiographs.

In radiographic den-

sitometry of the adult lumbar spine in lateral projection, the correct kilovoltage is best determined by multiplying the lateral body thickness (cm) at the level of vertebra L3 by a factor of 3. The same factor is also used with the AP

projection of the femoral neck as measured in supine position.

52
LO0
.g5 aJ J .90 w _D .85 _Z
.80

DEVELOPI_ENT

OF METHODS

I

I

54

56

58

FIGURE 3.--Relationship equivalency

I

I

60

62

KILOVOLTS

I

I

64

66

68

of apparent

X-ray

with kilovoltage.

aluminum

IN BONE DENSIT01_ETRY

Ę

L8C I. 70

58 KV

1.6C
_. l.SC
|
1.4C

60 KV

,Z,L3C -J
> 1.2C
6 UJ I. tC _E _l,OC

.9C ,8C
.70
.6C .5(3
0

I

I

I

I

I

I00

200

300

400

500

600

M I LLIAM PE RE- SECONDS

FIGURE 4.--Relationship

equivalency

with

62 kV.

of intensity

apparent X-ray of exposure at

aluminum 58, 60, and

.O4

INTENSITY,

r, THROUGH

6ram ALUMINUM

.04

IN ONE SECOND, 1O MA., 20 INCHES

.040

.038

.036
_c
>- .034
I--
Z.032
tJJ I--
z .o3c

.028

.026 .024

.022

.020

58

59

I

I

I

I

I

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

EFFECTIVE

KILOVOLTS

(I mm alumi.um filtrotion)

FIGURE 5.--Relationshlp of radiant intensity with kilovoltage at specific instrument settings on T. W. U. General Electric X-ray unit.

░ "PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

Part II. Cross Calibration Units

of Separate

X-ray

It has been possible to calibrate the effective

kv of other X-ray units with the central unit

at Texas Woman's University by means of a

calibration curve relating kV with the transmit-

tance through a standard aluminum filter under

a specific X-ray intensity. Figure 5 indicates

t.BA,f, tha onaro_-int_.n._itv ........

varlanf-_

j

.............

of f,ha ee.nt_.l

T.W.U. unit are related by a curvilinear time-

tion. For example, on the central unit the

X-ray transmittance

at 64 kV through a stand-

ard 6-mm aluminum filter at 10 MAS and 20

inches distance is 0.034 r. In comparing an un-

calibrated unit against the T.W.U. unit to obtain

a corresponding

64 kV, a 10-MAS exposure is

made on a 0.02 r Victoreen ionization cham-

ber resting in a lead boat which absorbs back-

OF LUMBAR

SPINE AND FEMORAL

NECK

53

scattered rays. In accordance with the calibra-

tion curve, a 0.040-r exposure would indicate

an actual X-ray energy of 67 kV. In order to

align the latter unit with the central unit, a se-

ries of exposures must be made until a trans-

mittance of 0.034 r is obtained under the speci-

fied conditions.

The result indicated kV would

then be used as the equivalent central unit.

of 64 kV on the

Preliminary aluminum-bone

radiographs

of the piexigiass-

ash phantom made on five X-

ray units in three locations, without any

attempt for cross-calibrating,

yielded widely

different values as shown in ascending order in

table I. The maximum difference of 31%

(units 1 and 5) proves that it would

cious to attempt to compare with two uncalibrated units.

results

be fallaobtained

T_LE I.--Alurainum

Efuivalencies

Obtained on Five Noncallbrated

Tev_

(60 kV, 100 MAS, 36 inches, 3-tara alum_nu_

Patterson high-speed svreens)

X-ray Units at Same Indifdtra2ion_ Cronex I fil_ in

Unit No.

Model

Site

Aluminum

equivalemcy

1 .................. 2 .................. 3 .................. 4 .................. 5 ..................

Picker 200 ma .................. G.E. 300 ma .................... Picker Aeromax ................. G.E. KX8 ...................... G.E. 11D54 ....................

Flow Hospital ................... Flow Hospital ...................

Finlay-Lockwood

................

T.W.U .........................

Finlay-Lockwood

................

O. 718 .746 .925 Ę 980
1. 010

The instrument which provided the lowest value (unit No. 1 at Flow Hospital) was selected for calibration with the T.W.U. unit.

Exposures were first made at 58 and 60 kV on the T.W.U. unit and then the standard absorber

was reassembled on the unit at Flow Hospital.

Previous calibration exposures, using the described ionization chamber method s had shown that dial settings of 54 and 56 kV on the Flow Hospital unit corresponded with indicated kilovoltages of 58 and 60 on the T.W.U. X-ray

unit. The comparative

results obtained after

cross-calibration

of the two units are shown in

table II. All technique factors except kilovoltage remained constant in this experiment. It is clearly indicated that, with careful prior

calibration

using the described

ionization

chamber method, quite accurate kilovoltage

compensations

can be applied for comparative

purposes when different X-ray units must be

used.

TABLE II.---Gomparative

Aluminum

Equiva-

lence Values Derived from Two Separate X-

ray Units a per Kilovoltage

Compensat_n

Test No. Flow Hospital Unit

T.W.U. Unit

Difference between
values

1

0.990 (54 kV)__ 0.978 (58 kV) ....

1. 2%

2

0.939 (56 kV)__ 0.954 (60 kV) .... 1. 7%

54

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

INTENSITY

OF EXPOSURE

With effective X-ray wavelength,

emulsion

characteristics,

and processing factors remain-

ing constant, the "blackness" of the X-ray im-

age is controlled by the intensity of the X-ray

beam. The intensity, in turn, is the result of

combined milliamperage,

exposure time, and

focal-film distance. It has been a generally ac-

cepted principle in diagnostic radiography

that

intensity tube-film

changes distance

accountable to changes in can be compensated for by

varying the milliamperage

or exposure time

without affecting the resulting intensity--sup-

posedly by reducing or increasing the product

of ma and time in accordance with the square

of the change in tube-film distance. We have

found that this formula is not acceptable with-

in the rigorous requirements of bone densitom-

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

etry. With the tube-film distance, kilovoltage, and filtration remaining constant, however, it has been found that the MAS may be changed

within fairly large limits without causing sub-

stantial changes in X-ray aluminum equiv-

alency. Figure 6 indicates that the apparent

aluminum

equivalency

of the standard

Plexiglas-aluminum-bone

ash phantom

in-

creases with increasing M_AS. With the phan-

tom used in these tests, having the same thick-

ness of the human hip (17.8 cm), the optimum

exposure was determined to be 275 MAS at 60

kV and 48 inches using Dupont Cronex I film and Patterson high-speed screens. From this

optimum exposure it was found that MAS

could be increased or decreased by 30% without

causing errors in reproducibility

greater than

1.8%. Further increases in M_kS beyond 30%

1.10

AI.05
5
E E
I.O0 z w _J > z) 0 .g5 w
z) z :E .9C D _1
.85

.80

I

,I

I

II

I

I

II

II

II

I

II

I00

200

300

400

500

M I LLI AM PERE.- SECON DS

FIGURE 6.--Relationship

of apparent aluminum

equivalency

with intensity

of exposure.

. . PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

OF LUMBAR

SPINE

AND FEMORAL

NECK

55

from the optimum resulted in some reduction

of the aluminum equivalency value (4.2% with

a 60% M.AS increase).

On the other hand, a

decrease in MAS below 30% resulted in severe

inaccuracies.

The graph also indicates the pres-

ence of a plateau as the MAS is increased with

sufficient length so that minor changes in M_AS

will not significantly equivalency.

affect the X-ray aluminum

BEAM FILTRATION

Although

the effective wavelength

of the

beam is shortened as the aluminum filtration is

increased, this variable is easily has not been studied extensively gation.

controlled, so it in this investi-

Figure 7 indicates that the aluminum equivalency value is apparently increased in accord-

ance with increasing filtration by about 3.5% per mm of aluminum up to 3 mm, followed by a more pronounced increase at 4 mm. Since the

wavelength of the beam is effectively shortened

as the soft waves are removed by filtration, it

would be expected that the apparent aluminum

equivalency

would be decreased

with added

filtration as indicated by figure 3. Since this does not occur, however, it is obvious that the

accompanying

overall intensity decrease is the

predominating

factor which causes the appar-

1,30

1.20 E
,_t. r0
z
_l.OC w
z _ .90

.70

I

I

I

I

I

2

3

4

ALUMINUM

FILTRATION

(MILLIMETERS)

FIGURE 7.--Effect

of increasing

aluminum

filtration

on

apparent

aluminum

equivalency.

ent density increase with the heaviest filtration. The aluminum filters furnished by the manufacturers of X-ray equipment are ordinarily machined to close tolerance, thus it is doubtful that variations in aluminum filtration are a significant factor in X-ray densitometry as long as the same thickness is used repeatedly. The window of the X-ray tube itselfhas an inherent filtrationb,ut thisshould be insignificantat the relatively bAgh _.er_es used in the teclmique.

FILM PROCESSING

FACTORS

During the course of these investigations

on

reproducibility

of X-ray aluminum equivalency

on living subjects it became apparent that

although duplicate films of the same subject ex-

hibited good reproducibility

when exposed and

processed on the same day, a pair of films ex-

posed a day or so later customarily showed good

agreement with each other but often showed

poor agreement with the previous films. The

observed differences as 15%.

were occasionally

as high

An experiment was designed to determine the effects of day of development upon the apparent bone density. First it was necessary to determine if films exposed within a 5-minute interval

would, after being separated into two groups, yield the same film-to-film variations when de-

veloped sinmltaneously

or when developed indi-

vidually at 24-hour intervals.

For this experi-

ment ten separate exposures were made of the

aluminum-plexiglass-bone

ash phantom within

a 5-minute interval.

Six films were developed

immediately, and four were retained for devel-

opment at consecutive PA-hour intervals.

Fig-

ure 8 indicates the apparent aluminum equiva-

lency of each of the ten films, with 1-6 being

developed simultaneously

while films 7-10 were

processed at the same time of day for four con-

secutive days. The maximum difference among

the films developed simultaneously

was 2.7%,

with a 1.3% deviation from the mean value.

However, in the case of the films exposed at the same time but retained for day-by-day development, the maximum variation was 15.4%, with an average deviation from the mean of 3.8%.
Films 9 and 10 on the graph were exposed together but developed one day apart with an in-

56

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENS_TOMETRY

,

LOO

.9.5
<.
E E
u z .90
I.IJ ,,J
< > or '" .85
z
j_ .80
-'/5

DEVELOPED

SIMULTANEOUSLY

(MAXIMUM

VARIATION

= 2.7"/.)

DEVELOPED ON CONSECUTIVE

DAYS

(MAXIMUM VARIATION = 15.4_4}

I

I

I

2

!

l

I

3

4

5

6

FILM NUMBER

I

I

7

8

I

I

9

I0

FIGURE 8.--Variations

in apparent

aluminum

equivalency

among films exposed together and developed

taneously,

and films exposed together

and developed

at consecutive

24-hour intervals.

simul-

termediate change of X-ray processing solu-

tions. The difference between their respective

aluminum equivalencies of 0.901 and 0.913 is

1.3%, indicating that age of X-ray processing

solutions was not a significant factor in this

particular experiment.

Although the experiment does not prove con-

clusively that changes in temperature or com-

position of the X-ray processing solutions

caused day-to-day fluctuations in sensitivity, it

does indicate that the chances of consistency

would be improved by developing all films at

one time, preferably

in developer prepared

fresh daily.

INSTRUMENT REPRODUCIBILITY

AND

PROCESS

The photometric

instrument

used in these

evaluations

consists essentially

of a Knorr-

Albers microphotometer

(manufactured

by the

Leeds and Northrup Company) omax G pen and ink recorder.

and a SpeedBoth instru-

ments have been modified for the specific ap-

plication of bone densitometry.

The instru-

mentation and computation processes have been

found to be highly reproducible

in multiple

evaluations of the same radiographs.

How-

ever, as in all radiation measuring devices with which the writer is familar, an occasional spurious error will occur. For this reason each film is routinely evaluated twice and if the difference in values is within 2% for the femoral

neck, or 3% for the third lumbar vertebra, the

average of the two values is reported as

aluminum equivalency.

Figure 9 illustrates the frequency tion of errors in replicate evaluations

distribuof radio-

graphs of the 84 femoral necks and 124 third

lumbar vertebrae produced in this study. A

comparison

of the slopes indicates that the

. .. PRECISION OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

OF LUMBAR SPINE AND FEMORAL NECK

57

45

40 35 _ 3G -
z zo
W 15 I n_ I.L
I0
5-

ILl ..J
I-Z W U CC td O.
0
I
%
I-%.. ,,.
I
i i

ó1.1 ..J
l-Z I.d U
W CL
O
I
I
"i
_Ę

LUM BAR VERTEBRAE

0

i I !1

W ._1

40

Z

w

\ 35

U W

i i. , i T---_ I I I I
FEMORAL NECKS

30

0

W

ff'j

..j

25

l t

Z

t

U

t

U

Z LIJ

20

0
ILl 15

1

o

I\

i

I0

I

'

m

i

- ,.:,--,,,

0

I

Ę

Ę_

Ę

Ę

,.=,_,.. _ ,.,..,= _

oI

oI

oI.

_

oI

oI.

_

oI

o

oI .

o_ .

o[i

oIi

oIi

oIi

FIGURE 9.--Frequency

distribution

PER CENT ERROR
of errors between replicate evaluations vertebrae.

of femoral necks and lumbar

58

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

error between replicate evaluations of femoral necks is somewhat less than that of vertebrae.

In the case of the femoral neck, 50% of the time the error will be less than 2.9%, and 90% of the time it will be within 5.7%. In the case of the

vertebrae, 50% of the time replicate values will agree within 2.9%, and 90% of the time the agreement will be within 6.0%
Since an average of two evaluations is taken for replicates within 2% for the femoral neck or within 3% for the vertebrae, it is probable that the error accountable to instrument and

process reproducibility

is less than 2%. There-

fore, error arising from instrumentation

or

computation variations do not contribute ma-

terially to the overall error of the method.

CALCIUM

CHANGES

DETECTABLE

BY

RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

The value of any method of skeletal densitom-

etry is, of course, its sensitivity in detecting

small changes in bone mineralization

rather

than its high reproducibility

alone. Within

the current reproducibility

limits of vertebral

and femoral densitometry,

the variations in

X-ray aluminum equivalency

accountable to

experimental

error have been interpreted

in

terms of equivalent calcium content on a mass

basis in order to determine the magnitude by

which calcium must be lost or gained in order

to be detectable by the described method in its

current state of development.

In order for

"X-ray aluminum equivalency" to have mean-

ingful value in estimating ash content, the fol-

lowing anatomical or physical relationships

must be known : (1) the relationship of X-ray

aluminum equivalency to ash content (on a per-

cent basis) in hydrated bone, (2) the mass of

bone as estimated in _ivo, and (3) the propor-

tion of total ash composed of elemental calcium.

The first relationship has been measured dur-

ing a study involving 105 cadavers X-rayed

post-mortem, after which the body of vertebra

L3 was removed at autopsy for ash analysis.

The vertebral ash content on a weight-percent

basis is determined by the formula 9.54+ (9.84

x aluminum equivalency)=percent a correlation coefficient of r=0.93.

ash, having

IN BONE DE NSITOMETRY

The second relationship

(that between bone

mass and radiographic

measurements)

was de-

termined during the same investigation

in

which the hydrated bone mass in situ was esti-

mated by determining

the relationship

of bone

dimensions to the weight of the fresh vertebral

bodies removed at autopsy. It was found that

the lateral cross-sectional area of L3 (cm2), as

determined from magnification-corrected

lateral

radiographs,

was related to its hydrated mass

(grams) by a factor of 0.049. The Standard

Error of Estimate of vertebral mass was 4.2 g

at the 68% confidence level and 8.4 g at the 95%

confidence level. (The fully hydrated body of L3 in the adult male normally weighs about 50 g.) Although these errors obviously can be as

large as 20%, they will not seriously affect the accuracy of determining calcium accretion since elemental calcium comprises only about 8% of the weight of fully hydrated bone, and secondly, because the same hydrated bone weight is used

repeatedly individual.

in serial evaluations

of the same

The third factor, the proportion of bone ash

comprised of calcium, is taken to be 0.4 which is

the normal weight concentration

of calcium in

the hydroxyapatite

molecule Ca10 (PO4) 6.

(OH) 2.

It should be emp'hasized here that in serial

measurements of the same individual over a pe-

riod of time, the aforementioned

relationships,

which are somewhat arbitrary, are not applied

routinely.

The simpler unit of "aluminum

equivalency" permits the estimation of mineral

gain or loss between consecutive radiographs,

while the derived relationships

have been used

only to estimate the probable magnitude of the

changes in milligrams of calcium.

Precision at the L3 Site

The lumbar spine of a male subject, age 91,

was radiographed

_hree times at 3-day intervals.

The maximum difference among values of the

three tests was 5% (aluminum

equivalency

range: 1.35-1.49 mm/cm).

Bone dimensions

scaled directly from the radiographs,

subse-

quently corrected for image magnification, indicated a hydrated bone weight of 59 g. Such a

. . PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAP]_IC

DENSITOM'ETRY

variation in aluminum equivalency corresponds to an apparent variation in vertebral ash content of 22.8 to 23.5% for an apparent maximum

mass difference of 150 mg of calcium among the three determinations.

Surprisingly,

these values determined at 3-

day intervals are in somewhat closer agreement

than three values made of a second male subject

age 21, taken within a 10-minute period which

a";_la_a-_-a_, pm_ion of ,l_n., mg ,."ó calcium. T_s

indicates that the time variate did not signifi-

cantly affect the result. Therefore, within the

limits imposed presently by radiographic

den-

sitometry of the lumbar spine, changes of 170

mg of calcium within a single vertebral body

(or 4.2% of the total calcium in the average

adult male) appear to be the smallest amounts

presently detectable by the method.

Precision at the Femoral Neck Site

Duplicate radiographs

were made of the left

femoral neck of a 21-year-old male on four test-

ing dates at 5-day intervals.

The tube, film,

and subject were completely realigned for each

exposure, and the four films yielded aluminum

equivalency values agreeing within 2.5%, 2.7%,

0.6% and 1.3%, respectively.

The largest varia-

tion would require, in theory, a change of 80 mg

of calcium within the mid portion of the femoral

neck (or 3.0% of the total calcium) to produce

such a percent change in X-ray absorption. The

80-rag figure, therefore, is presently assumed

to be the smallest change in calcium detectable within the bone section examined.

SUMMARY

A summary of probable errors accountable

to the variable factors in radiographic densi-

tometry is shown in table III. Although every

attempt has been made to isolate the variable

errors according to the categories listed, in

some instances the total error will comprise two

or more variable errors. For example, the 3.4%

error in item no. 9, "repositioning

of subject," is

also affected by such variables as nonuniformity

of radiographic

emulsions and kilovoltage vari-

ations, although the darkroom processing factors and instrument errors are minimized.

792-955

OF LUMBAR

SPINE AND FEMORAL

NECK

59

TABLE III.--Summary

of Analyses o/Variable

Errors

Ę_gt_

A_era_e e_rcr

1. Instrument

and process re-

producibility.

2. Fluorescent

screen sensitiv-

ity. 3. Intensity

(max time) with-

in 20 % of optimum sure.

expo-

4. Variations

per kV change

(58-62 kV) :

(a) Low MAS .........

(b) Intermediate

MAS__

(c) Moderately

high

MAS.

(d) High MAS .........

5. Temperature solution

of developing

6. Age of developing

solutions

at constant temperature.

7. Routine darkroom

errors

when same
8. Routine

films processed

at

time.

darkroom

errors

when films processed

at

24-hour intervals.

9. Repositioning site.

of subject, L3

10. Repositioning

of subject,

femoral neck site.

11. Different X-ray units (non-

calibrated).

12. Different X-ray units (cali-

brated against T.W.U.

unit). 13. COMPOUND

VARIABLE

ERRORS

MAY BE AC-

COUNTABLE

FOR

TOTAL

ERRORS

OF

UP TO 5% AT THE

L3 SITE, AND UP TO

2.7% RAL

AT THE FEMONECK SITE.

2.0% (S.D.= 1.5%) 1.0% (S.D.=0.9%) 0.5% (S.D.=0.2%)

10.2% (S.D.=2.0%) 5.2% (S.D.=2.2%) 3.0% (S.D.=1.4%)

1.4% (S.D.=1.2%)

No measurable

error

between 67 ░ and

69 ░

1.3 % (one test only)

1.3% (S.D.= 1.0%)

3.8% (S.D. = 1.3%)

2.1% (S.D.= 1.1%) 1.8% (S.D.=0.3%) 12.7% (S.D.=3.8) 1.9% (S.D.= 1.6%)

Although kilovoltage variations may produce errors of 10% or more, at optimum exposure intensity the error is concluded to be 1.4% per kilovolt change.

The apparent error between two different X-

ray units may be reduced from the maximum

observed error of 31% to approximately

2% by

use of an ionization chamber method of cali-

brating two units.

6O

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DE N_,ITOMETRY

The major error in X-ray densitometry

of

Dr. CAMERON. I am impressed

with the results you

4

vertebra L3 and the femoral neck appears to be

get on these thick bones.

I did not see the work on

the failure to reposition the subject in precisely

the same way in follow-up exposures.

Cur-

the vertebrae.

I saw this mostly on the head

femur.

What does the vertebrae

show?

Dr. VOSE. It is not quite as good as the neck

of the of the

rently, the total error appears to be approx-

femur.

We feel that we can work within not more

imately 2%, although errors of up to 5% may

occur at the L3 site and up to 2.7% at the femoral

neck site. Assuming the maximum error to be

the case, the limits in determining

calcium

changes within a single bone between successive

tests appear to be about 170 mg in vertebra

L3 and 80 mg in the femoral neck. In adult

males variations of this magnitude would indi-

cate changes of 4.2% and 3.0% in vertebra L3

and the femoral neck, respectively, of the total

than 5% error in the third lumbar vertebrae,

while

we work within 3% on the neck of the femur.

Dr. SCHRAER. What about ash versus density value?

Dr. Vosz. With the help of Dr. Herster at Austin

State Hospital,

we evaluated

cadavers

to see the rela-

tionship

of the X-ray value compared

with the actual

ash value of a bone at autopsy.

We did the very

difficult job of carrying

the 106 bodies to the X-ray

room, taping them up in a lateral

position,

and X-

raying them.

We then wheeled them off to the morgue

and removed the third lumbar vertebrae.

We plotted

the values obtained densitometrically

and found a cor-

calcium. It is possible that additional refinements can be made which will result in increased
precision of the X-ray densitometric technique.

relation

coefficient

of 0.93.

There are various possible

had a spread of about 2% on the curve, we think this

sources of error. of the actual ash could be improved.

If we content
On a

COMMENTS

patient

that has died of chronic

illness, apparently

there is more bowel gas than in a norm,al person.

This

Dr. CAMZRON. Did yOU use grids in order scatter radiation?

to reduce

Dr. Vosz. We had to use buttons.

Dr. CA_ZRON. It improves

quite ,a bit. I think Dr.

Rockoff's

work was done without

also might affect the measurements.

any grids, which

Dr. V0SE. In addition,

the phantom

was lined in lead

on the sides. The sleeve was slipped down over the

phantom

and we shot all pictures

through

an aperture

in the lead sheet over the X-ray films, trying to cut out

as much extraneous

undercut

scattering

as we could.

Dr. SCHRAER. Did you have any results studies ?

of vertebrae

Dr. Vosz. Unfortunately,

I do not have any photo-

graphs to show you, but it now appears, except for the

gas which we can see on the X-ray film taken by our

technique

(and if we see it, we can eliminate

it) that if

we take another

film the following

day of the same

patient, we appear to be working in not more than a 5%

error.

Duplicate

films are made of each subject, and

was a complication

in some instances,

and caused some

errors which content.

seemed

to indicate

a 2% change

in ash

Another

source of possible error was that in remov-

ing the extraneous

tissue from the bone, we had to

maintain

the bone at hydrated

weight, and at the same

time, remove all the tissue, leading to slight errors in

obtaining presented

the ash content.

The ash content data

on a hydrated

basis, not a dry ash basis.

were We

had a higher correlation

that way.

Dr. WHEDON. Dr. Vose, have you made some meas-

urements

of the reproducibility

of the bone density

measurement

in the same individual

from one time to

another within a few days' or a few weeks' time?

Dr. VOSE. Yes. On one of the most recent tests, un-

fortunately,

we found a slightly larger error when we

X-rayed the same patients within 5 minutes than when

we X-rayed

him the following

day. Nonetheless,

we

have tried to outguess

this and estimate

how much

mineral

must have been lost to account

for such a

the films are evaluated

twice.

If they are found to be

within 3%, then the average of the two values is taken.

Dr. RIcm What sort of a problem

would be intro-

duced if you were following of time and the patient

a patient over some period

lost weight?

This would

change the scatter.

Could you compensate

for this

just by taking out some of your phantom? Dr. VOSE. We would not dare to compensate

for this

by changing

the kilovolt age even though we put the

caliper across the patient.

We would have to retain

the same kilovoltage, where this is applied

and we just hope in the studies that there won't be a tremendous

change

as we

change in vivo,

case of a femur

saw. we
neck

In estimating

the bone mass

decided that this change in the

would be about 70 mg of calcium,

and in the case of the body of a third lumbar vertebra,

it would be a maximum

of 170 mg of calcium.

That is

the sensitivity

seen at the present time.

Dr. WHZDON. What is that in terms of proportion

to

the total mass of the part by volume or weight?

Dr. VOSE. In the case of the vertebrae,

this

amount

that would have to be lost from the

is the entire

vertebral

body to be detected by this system.

loss of weight.

If there were a tremendous

loss of

In the case of the femur necks, the site we used

weight, we would have to retain the same kilovoltage,

has a volume of about 15 cm. a You have to lose that

but possibly lower the intensity

of exposure

somewhat.

--70 mg of calcium

in 15 cm 8 of femur neck. We

Ę . PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOM'ETRY

hope by some new techniques

we are using to reduce

this to approximately

20 mg.

Dr. WHm)ON. Could you translate

these weight fig-

urea into some sort of a percentile

estimate ?

Dr. Nom)r_. There are about 6 g of ash in a vertebral

body. Well, 160 mg of calcium is about 400 mg of ash, so that a loss of 400 mg in 6 g is about 79'o.

Dr. SMITH. What is the geometric

led you to pick that triangular

area

in the neck of the femur ?

consideration

that

and its dimensions

Dr. VosF_ This is what is called Ward's triangle, the

part of the b_ne ha osteopor_)sis

that appeared

to be

demineralized femur neck. is fractured

visually

before any other part of the

It is ideally located and is the part that

with the transverse

fracture of the femur

neck. We thought it would applying this measurement.

be the most

logical

site for

Dr. S_rrH. How many individual

density measure-

ment readings were made within that triangle we saw ? Dr. VOSE. Four readings are routinely made.

Dr. S_ITH. The variations

may be high within your

square.

Dr. VOSE. No, they are surprisingly

close. We make

four, but the average of the readings is very close. Dr. L_oY. Dr. Vose, when you say that you can de-

tect a loss of 6% from a vertical

body, with what

degree of confidence

is this?

At 95% confidence,

or

90% confidence,

or what?

Dr. Vos_ In the case of the third lumbar vertebra,

the 90% confidence

level for error is between about 5

and 5.9% ; at the 5D% level, it is 3.9%.

In the case of

the femoral neck, at the 90% confidence

level, the per-

cent error is 4 to 4.9%, and at the 70% level it is

about 2.5%.

Dr. RocKO_.

Dr. Vose, in your pubIished

graph of

X-ray equivalency

versus the vertebral

ash content,

the regression

through

8.5%

line on vertebral

ash content

goes

ash and zero aluminum

equivalency.

That is, if the bone entirely

disappears,

according

to

your data, you still have 8.5% of vertebral

ash present.

Dr. VOSE. We apparently

do have a greater error on

the bones that are very lowly mineralized.

We did

not dare curve that off, so we simply extended it and

made a straight

line. We do not seem to have enough

points yet to determine We do not dare predict

just where the line should go. the total calcium content, when

the total bone ash is below 9 or 10%.

Dr. ROCKOFF. YOU have about

a tenth of aluminum

equivalency,

ten points, as low as which extends out

as far as 11 or 12% bone ash, which is large when

you consider that 27% bone ash is the highest figure

you have. I think there is a bias in the system.

Dr. VOSE. Obviously

there should not be a straight

slope all the way through that. We have also noticed

that. In a few cases on the Herster's

values we had

to report a negative value because a straight line was

shown.

We do not think that is exactly right either.

Dr. NoRris. Dr. Vose, did you exclude corpses from that reject figure of yours ?

the gas filled

OF LUMBAR

SPLNE AND FEMORAL

NECK

61

Dr. VOSF_ In some cases we did have to eliminate

some of the cadavers.

When we had a small gas pocket.

we could visualize it by our system.

I don't think you

can visualize it by tomography.

Dr. Noman_. Our studies on corpses has been with

plain lumbar

films, and I have found that the films

are virtually

unusable because of the combination

of

gas and feces.

Dr. VOSF_ This is a more drastic problem than in living human beings, but if the gas pocket is large and if it is uniform, covering all of the body of the vertebrae

and also the adjacent soft tissue, then it apparently cancels itself out somewhat.

Dr. RICH. The fact that you sometimes go down in

these density studies--and other methods do this, too--

to values that really look pretty much like or less than

no bone at all may not be entirely due to these technical

factors that I don't understand, because the vertebrae

are filled with fat, of course. They can have a good

deal of fat in the marrow.

Fat has a lower mass

coefficient that saline or water; therefore, in fact, the

background in these measurements

may not be the

same as the same volume of muscle. In other words,

the vertebrae that has almost no bone has something

in there.

Dr. Vosm We try to compensate for this soft tissue

absorption by use of plastic, but in a few cases we

have found vertebrae which had a 30% fat content.

Dr. RICH. And fat does have a lower mass coefficient?

Dr. Vosm Fat has a lower mass coefficientthan water

or protein.

Dr. CAM_ZON. HOW easy would it be for a Depart-

ment of Radiology in a hospital to do these measure-

ments? Would it be a big project, do you think?

Dr. VOSE. One of the big problems is calibrating the

X-ray machines. We have run test films on five X-ray

machines in Denton and have obtained values with a

maximum spread of 30%, using the same settings ac-

cording to the kilovoltage meter. We have attempted

to calibrate the machines, taking the worst pair; and

by means of an ionization chamber, based in a lead

boat under the tube, we determined the roentgens out-

put on our own machine at the T.W.U., then experi-

mented with one in the local hospital until we obtained

the same energy output_

This reduced the maximum

30% error to somewhat less than 2%, using the plastic

phantom.

From one hospital to another this would definitely

have to be done.

We would have to calibrate

the

machines,

one against another, assuming

we had one

central unit. The densitometry

would

to be done on one or two densitometers.

definitely

have

Dr. SCHRAER. In your graph, the title of the table

is "Changes

in Calcium

Content

of the Skeleton

Detectable

by Non-Destructive

Techniques."

A subject is assumed

in his skeleton.

First,

to have 1000 grams of calcium we will say that the method of

detection is unknown for the time being, and the error

in the technique,

shall we say, is 1%. Now, 1% means

62

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHOD_

10 g of calcium in this case. If the calcium balance was

0.1 g per day, consistently

up or down, this would mean

that a hundred

days would be required

to see a 1%

change, skeleton.

if this change was uniform

over the whole

On a 0.4 g per day balance,

this would

require only 25 days. As the percent error in technique

goes up to the 5% level, it would take a minimum

of

125 days on 0.4 g per day balance to see a change.

Now for the conventional

radiographic

which most radiologists

use (their eyes),

technique this would

require 750 dayu.

Clearly, then, any attempt at quantification

improvement

over what the conventional

is a big radiologist

can do. We cnnnot expect miracles

in the first place.

We cannot see changes as rapidly as we would like, but

it is a better

method

by far than conventional

radiography. Dr. Vosz.

In addition,

Dr. Schraer,

we might men-

tion that some bones apparently

are more susceptible

to change assuming

than others, and your that they are changing

calculations the same

would be throughout

the skeleton.

Dr. WHZDON. Dr. V_se was ju'st emphasizing

a point

that I think many of us would make : that loss of cal-

cium under either pathological

or physiological

cumstances

is not uniform

across the skeleton.

cir]t i,s

greater in one part of 'the skeleton than another.

_In

large measure,

of course, it is in proportion

amount of trabecular

bone that is available.

to the

Dr. ROCKO_'F. I would like to pursue the issue of

linearization.

I think linearization

is an important

issue, but not ,so much with techniques

for measuring

cortical thickness or with techniques

which are looking

for gross changes.

If we are going to claim that we can

identify

minor changes,

I think we have to define the

validity of using this technique.

We all remember

that the first approximation

of

the effect or, let us say, the change in radiation

is given

by the formula,

i equals

Even when monochromatic

i zero e to the minus mu.

radiation

is used (the mu

being some monochromatic

amount

of linear absorp-

tion coefficient of some monochromatic

radiation)

it is

not a linear absorption

function.

This is further

com-

plicated by the fact, as I pointed out earlier, that with

heterogeneous

radiation

there is a change in amount

and then a change in frequency

distribution.

Dr. Mack suggests

that perhaps the straight

line re-

lationship

(fig. 12, "counts"

vs. stepwise

increases

in

calcium)

is :the correct one because it is a straight

line,

and I point out that it is a straight

line because

lationship

was made a straight line relationship

the reby the

linearization

technique.

Dr. VOGT. Nature gave us this nonlinear

curve with

the wedge that we get out of the first recorder,

but

Nature also gave us a linear wedge of which we took a

film at the same time that we X-rayed bone or calcium.

_Ve can convert

a nonlinear

function

into a linear

function or to provide a calibration

factor, and that is

IN BONE

DEN_ITOMETRT

..

what we are doing.

This is a calibration

technique

rather than a straightening

out of a trace which means

_omething

else.

Dr. Mack's mechanical

and electrical

system is an

integrating

microdensitometer.

Put in simpler words,

it is an electromechanical

servo system, probably

one

of the simplest servo systems that exist.

The initial steps for preparing

a film to be put into

the densit_meter

consist, first of all, in the procedures

involved

in the technique

of taking the film, in the

placement

of the subject,

and wedge, the placement

in the placement

of the film

of the X-ray beam, which is

set by means of a light .beam, and all the way through

the developing

technique,

the handling

of the fihns

prior to processing,

_nd locating

the two anatomical

landmarks

that you are going to scan.

Any time you discuss a technique

in which you are

getting good reproducibility,

you have to discuss

the

method of acquiring

the data as well as the instrumen-

tation that you used to record it. The primary purpose of this instrumentation

system

is to make every wedge on every film equivalent

to

one another.

In other words, as Dr. Rockoff pointed

out this morning,

there are many factors that can in-

fluence the optical density

of an X-ray film, if you

don't make corrections

or at least do the same thing

to the film each time. E_en if you do the same thing

to the film each

sities.

Therefore,

some reference.

time, you can get different as has been pointed

optical denout, we need

Dr. Mack starts out by having

detector.

This is zero transmission

no light strike her of light to the de-

tector.

She then goes out 13 cm on the wedge (it is

the same wedge on every amount of light transmission.

film) and gets a certain If this X-ray film had

been exposed

differently

from a preceding

one, she

might get a different

optical

density.

In fact, she

would get a different

light transmission.

Therefore,

some correction

has to be made to make this wedge

equivalent

to the wedge on the previous

film. This is

done by adjusting

the light source through the film so

that 13 cm out the wedge gives full scale

on the recorder.

Her first recorder

initially

deflection is set up

so that zero reading

is zero light transmission,

and

100% or full scale reading is the transmission

of light

13 cm out the wedge.

In other words, we are making

every wedge on every film the same.

Then as Dr. Mack traces this first film, she gets a

nonlinear

type of trace, as you saw for the 5 : 1 wedge

and the 10:1 wedge, its nonlinearity

depending

upon

what portion of the full H and D curve you are on.

Because

of this nonlinear

trace, there must be some

means to convert it or to make a multiplication

factor

for reach reading.

This is done by means of a slidewire

potentiometer.

This now becomes the electromechani-

cal part because it is mechanically

coupled to the pin

on the recorder.

A correction

is made along each of the

20 sections to make the raw film give a reading that you

░ -PRECISION

OF RADIOGRAPHIC

DENSITOMETRY

would expect for the aluminum

which

a linear function.

Dr. Mack has a technique

that has

you know to be been developed

by reading is calibrated. are shunted

from the raw curve with a little scale that

She can set the 20 potentiometers

which

with a 50-ohms potentiometer

which has

a thousand

steps in it, providing a resistance

range of

from zero to 33 ohms.

Since this is a mechanical

sys-

tem, linked directly,

and the recorder

is driven by

direct coupling,

any correction

made at one part of

this curve does not influence the correction made at any

other part of the curve. In actual practice,

when Dr.

Mack is making a densitometry

tracing and calibrates

the wedge (or if you like, linearizes

the wedge), the

wedge is linear.

Therefore

it does not matter whether

one goes from zero to the full range or simply Hnear-

izes it over a portion.

I feel that since the range of bone density measure-

ments made on the groups of subjects we worked with,

going from about 50 to around 80% of the total wedge

length, does not make any difference,

it is good to have

the wedge as she has i_

Now again, we get away from the electrical

part of

the system and come back into the mechanical

part

of the system.

This integrator

is mechanically

linked

to .the pin on the recorder

so that the displacement

or

drive of the pin from zero gives a certain displacement

of the slidewire

potentiometer,

which then drives the

integrator,

and integrates

the area under the second

curve.

To show the reproducibility

of densitometry

of the

os calcis, eight films were taken of my left os calcis at

a hundred milUon amperes, 60 kV, and 0.6 second ex-

posure.

I got on and off the table between each of the

eight films, was repositioned,

and an exposure

was

made.

After the films were developed, each was run through

the densitometer

three times, and the data show the

reproducibility.

The statistician

reports that the mean

total for the total scan across the os calcis is 11,092.79,

+75.12.

At the 99% confidence

level, this presents an

error or standard error of ▒0.75% and if we add them

together, we get 1Į%. Dr. ZEa_. That is standard

error ?

Dr. VOOT. Right.

Dr. Z_N.

What you really want to quote is the var-

iation between

films, that is, what agreements

you

would expect to get on two independent by two different films.

measurements

OF LUMBAR

SPINE _

FEMORAL

.NECK

63

Dr. VOGT. I have these here, too, in much more detail,

but I think this really shows the same thing. I realize that the more times you have, the better you get, but

at least it tells you for your 99% confidence

level what

range or reproducibility about.

or error that you are talking

Dr. ZELE_. It is an inappropriate

figure to give.

Dr. WHm_ON. Standard

error has more to do with

the validity of the mean than it has to do with indicat-

ing what the variation

is. An appropriate

figure to

give for reproducibility [_'etttor_s postcor_]erence

is the standard

deviation.

note: Review of Dr. Mack's

table I with Dr. J. Z. Hearon, Office of Mathematical

Research,

NIAMD

(NIH),

indicates

that the mean

for the 24 total integrator

counts columns

is 11,160,

with a standard

deviation

of ▒51.4;

although

the

standard

error was not actually

calculated,

it would

be less, approximately

20. The meaning

of this is

that, even though Dr. Vogt's figures are not intelligible

to us, he and his statistician

have been very conserva-

tive and that for repeated films at the same time on

the same individual,

the method appears to be highly

reproducible. lar pertinence to take one

An additional

observation

of particu-

to practical use of the method would be

film on the same individual

on several

successive

days, then calculate the standard

of this group of measurements.--D.

W.]

deviation

Dr. LIYTWAK. It would help to solve the controversy

in my mind if you were to take the calcium data, cali-

brated from the linearized

system, and put them back

through the system again, backward

; would you then

come up with the HD shaped curve? I do not think there is any controversy.

If you did, then

Dr. VOGT. Certainly.

Dr. LUTWAK. I think the problem

is one of

semantics

again.

We are talking about linearization.

You are really not linearizing

; you are calibrating,

and

you are esta, blishing the standard

curve which is easier

for the machine to handle and for you to see.

Dr. VOGT. For the special puter is used.

purpose

an analog com-

Dr. MACK. If you were doing something

where your

values would be quite low, you would not use the sim-

ple linearization

wedge; you would not use the same

wedge that you used where the values are scattered.

We pick our wedges according

to the bone to be

measured : for the little finger, we have a different

one from that for the os calcis, wedge for the back.

and still a different

,5
q
767 _

Comparison ofCortical Thickness and Radiographic Microdensitometry in the Measurement of
Bone Loss

SrAm.EY M. G_tN, ELISE FEtrrz, CHXXLF.S COLBERT, AND BErrY WAGNXX, Fels Research Institute

In contrast to radiographic microdensitom-

etry, which has the longer history of application

despite greater technological complexity, the far

simpler measurement of cortical thickness on

radiographs (i.e., microradiogrammetry)

is vir-

tually a technical newcomer. Prior to 1960 very

few attempts to employ_ cortical thickness were

made; and, except for Trotter's pioneering com-

parison of cortical thickness to absolute bone

volume in the femur (Trotter, 1954), these at-

tempts were largely restricted to studies primar-

ily of genetical import (Hewitt, 1957/8; Garn,

1962).

Since Virtama and M_h6nen (1960), there

has been a considerable and increasing interest in the measurement of cortical thickness on X-

ray_ A growing volume of reports have come

from Nordin and his group (1960, 1965).

Meema and his associates (Meema, 1963; Meema

and Meema, 1963), Smith and his associates

(Smith and Walker, 1964; Smith and Frame,

1965; Smith, 1965), and the present author and his associates (Garn eL al., 1963, 1964; Garn eL

al., 1964; Cram eL al., 1964-a_ b, c, d; Garn eL al,

1965). The measurement of cortical thickness directly

on radiographs represents a novel and impor-

tant approach, obviously far more suitable for

tubular bones than for purely spongy bones, a

substitute for conventional radiographic microdensitometry in some cases, and a replacement in others.

RADIOGRAPHIC

TECHNIQUES

Radiographic techniques are not critical for the measurement of cortical thickness. Either

nonsereen or screen-type film can be employed, though the former gives superior detail. Hos-

pital, clinic, and survey films can be used for this purpos_ The PKV-MAS combination is not critical, though high PKV techniques (90-120 PKV) give flatter results for the hand and foot; and the 30-50 PKV range is greatly prvferred. Small variations in the tube-to-film

distance are not critical, though a completely fixed tube-to-film distance in meauring short term rates of bone loss is used. Coning-down

and preceding variables do not introduce errors in measurement, as they do in "bone densitometry." The same films can be used for the measurement of cortical thickness and for con-

ventional microdensitometry,

in which case

nonscreen film, a rather heavy exposure, and

careful attention to processing and coning-

down are then mandatory.

MEASURING

TECHNIQUES

Measuring equipment is not a major problem in making cortical thickness measurements. Much of our work over the last 5 years has been done with a stock $7.00 Fisher catalog Vernier caliper with 0.1 mm readout, modified by grinding the tips. We now prefer the $70.00 dial-reading, No. 1068C 6-inch replaceable needle-tip Helios metric caliper with 0.05 mm
65

66

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENS_ITOMETRY

readout (Carl 1%ise, Naw York) ; and for some

purposes we have employed the 0.1 mm readout,

large capacity, automatic print-out

GOAT,

manufactured

by the Gerber Instrument Com-

pany (Hartford,

Conn.). This latter instru-

ment prints the measurements directly onto pa-

per tape; and, as it is also motor driven, it

obviates both caliper fatigue and error due to

incorrect reading of Vernier or dial calibrations.

PERSONNEL

FACTORS

In studying cortical thickness, technician

training has not been a problem. Though our

preference has been for biologically trained col-

lege undergraduates

suitably interested

and

motivated, there is nothing about the technique

itself that places unique demands upon the

intelligent technician with some knowledge of

bone anatomy and familiarity with radiographic

techniques.

REPLICAB1LITY

AND

CORTICAL

THICKNESS

MENTS

VALIDITY

OF

MEASURE-

Replicability

of the cortical thickness meas-

urements is high, being of the order of 0.97-0.99

both for intraobserver

and interobserver

repli-

cability. Long term intraobserver replicability

is high, employing radiographs

of the same in-

dividual taken many years apart. In a recent

study comparing loss of compact bone over a

15 to 30-year period in the same individuals, we

were able to repeat earlier estimates of inter-

and intraobserver

reliability for the same sub-

jects. Although

there is slightly

greater

difficulty in ascertaining in older and osteoporotic server and intraobserver same order of magnitude

the endosteal surface

individuals,

interob-

reliability was of the

in each case (see table

1). Using the Helios caliper with 0.05 mm readout, it was shown that the RMS readout error was 0.15 mm. Since the average adult cortical thickness is between 4 and 7 mm in the

second metacarpal, as Smith, Nordin, and our group have shown, it should be possible to show a decrease of the order of 5% or less with con-

siderable There
cortical

reliability. is the question of where to measure the thickness on bones such as the second

metacarpal

that are effectively

spool-shaped.

We have taken

dumbbell or the cortical

measurement at mid-shaft, an arbitrary point,

but one which simplifies the speed of readout

and maximizes

reliability.

Dr. Richmond

Smith and his group make the cortical thickness

measurement at the area of minimum medullary

(marrow) cavity width, a point which may be

considered to have greater anatomical meaning.

There appears to be very good agreement be-

tween the two approaches, as shown by the com-

parison of our measurements

and those of Dr.

Richmond

Smith. The mid-shaft

measure-

ment appears simpler for routine assessment

and more replicable solute basis to prefer que over the other.

(fig. 1). There one measurement

is no abtechni-

We have explored the validity of the cortical

thickness measurements,

employing the meas-

urements of cortical thickness on the radio-

graphs with pinpoint calipers with the measurements of cortical thickness made from micro-

densitometric

traces of the same bones (see fig.

TABLE I.--Inter-Observer

and Intra-Observer

Replleability

of Cortical Bone Measurements

a

Subjects

Type of replicability

N

Fels subjects Fels subjects

........................ .........................

Fels subjects_

Fels subjects ........................

Fels mothers Fels mothers Senior citizens

(1945) ................... (1965) ................... ........................

Second metacarpal at mid-shaft.

Intra-observer Intra-observer Inter-observer Inter-observer Inter-observer Inter-observer Inter-observer

(PN) ...................

(DA) ....................

(PN-DA)

................

(PN-DA)

...............

(EH-ML)

...............

(EH-ML)

................

(EH-ML)

................

2O

0. 98

2O

Ę 95

20

_. 99

20

_. 99

43

Ę 98

43

Ę 99

25

Ę 98

o CORTICAL

THICKNESS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

h4:ICRODENSITO1M:ETRY

IN BONE LOSS _EASUREMENT

67

2). Considering the theoretical bone model as

that of a simple cylinde r and referring to radio-

graphs of this theoretical bone model simulated

by aluminum tubing, the true amount of

"cortex" can be understood,

and the radio-

graphs interpreted

in terms of the theoretical

bone model. Comparing cortex by micrometry

with that taken from the densitometrie '_race_"

the caliper measurement

taken directly on the

v.,x.....-..,.._...y.a_ppear *vo- be z.*.*..g.m.y.c.o.rl'elateu

w,_n the

trace measurement; atically overestimate

however they systemthe true cortical diameter

(table II). The caliper measurements

sub-

tract the bone medullary cavity from the total

periosteal diameter, slightly exaggerating

the

latter (i.e., measuring just outside of the true

periosteal diameter) and slightly underestimat-

ing the medullary cavity (i.e., measuring just

inside of the endosteal margin).

It has been

suggested that superior results might be ob-

tained by measuring the enlarged image of the

radiographs

instead of working directly on the

3O
25
(/) ><_ n_ 2o
!
x

INTER-OBSERVER REPL|CABILITY OF CORTEX MEASUREMENT

15
LL
0

n- IO LU _D
Z5

.....
0
'-o_ -o2 oo o_. o.4' ' o_

INTER-OBSERVER

DIFFERENCES (MM)

FIo_

1.--Interobserver

differences

in cortical thick-

ness of the second metacarpal

at mid-shaft

as meas-

ured on 98 radiographs

of adult females.

As shown,

the RMS error is of the order of 0.15 mm. With

intra- and interobserver 0.98, and with interobserver

replicability differences

better

than

of less than

0.2 ram, bone loss of the order of 5% may be reliably

measured

for the bone in question.

TABLE II.--Validation

of Cortical

Measurements

Thickness

(Comparison

of caliper micrometry

taken from the densitometric

with measurements trace 1)

Group

i

1. St. Louis
2. St. Louis 3. Combined

Negro males ....
Negro females___l sex ............

I 52
97 I 149
I

r

-I"

I

I 0. 87 t

I 0. 93 /

I 0.93

]

I

I

1 Cortical thickness by mi_ometry by Philip Nolan, Jr., and cortical thickness measurements from Joyce-Loebl densitometric trace by Elise Feutz.

radiographic

images themselves.

We have at-

tempted this, but the fall-off of definition at

even moderate enlargement

(5-10 times) com-

plicates rather than improves the situation (see

also fig. 3).

In the process of validation there is the com-

parison of the cortical diameters, as measured

above, with the aluminum equivalent densities

taken directly from the microdensitometric

traces made at the same point. A large series of

/_egro second metacarpals

were X-rayed at

Washington University School of Medicine by

Christabel

G. Rohmann.

The radiographs

were returned to the Fels Research Institute for

both caliper measurement.

measurement

and densitometric

The measurements

of cortical

thickness taken on the medial and lateral

aspects of the X-rays do not correspond exactly to the thickness of the cortex directly in the optical path (i.e., the thickness of the cortex wa/t on the dorsal and ventral sides of the

bone). This comparison

was made because

cortical thickness on the second metacarpal

must be taken as described above/n vlvo, while

the densitometrie

measurement

must reflect the

amount of cortex in the optical path, since bones

in the living subject are not free for separate

measurement in both the antero-posterior

and

lateral views! This comparison

of cortical

thickness and radi(graphic

density assumes

that the bulk of the radiographic

density in the

second metacarpal

is confined to the cortex

per se, an assumption which we have clarified

by taking radiographs

of isolated metacarpal

bones, cutting them in two at the mid-section,

removing bone in the medullary region, and

68

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

..

F r o m 2.-Above: Radiograph of aluminum tube used as a eimulated tubular bone model. B y making densitometric traces on the radiographic image of this tube with and without simulated soft tissue, t h e meaning of the densitometric trace becomes clearer. Below: Microdensitometric traces of simulated bone and boneplus-tissue radiographs. Configurations of t h e "cortex" and "medulla" are clearly seen. It is possible to interpret actual Joyce-Loebl microdensitometric traces of small tubular bones.

then again subjecting them to radiography and densitometric examinations (see fig. 4). The
obtained correlation of 0.6 between the thickness of the medial and lateral cortical walls, a s measured by caliper, and the aluminum equivalent density, as measured from the same radiographs, represents a reasonable degree of agreement. The true correlation (correcting
for attenuation of each of the measurements), the departure from circularity of the bones in-

volved, and the lack of concentricity of the medullary cavity may be estimated as of the order of 0.85 or better.
We can effectively describe the cortical thickneSs measurements as (a) having excellent repliability and (b) good validity, though it is clear that measuring thickness of cortex on each side of the bone a t mid-shaft is not identical with the measurement of radiographic density
a t the middle of the same bone.

o Cw0RTICAL THICKNESS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

MICRODENSITOMETRY

IN BONE LOSS MEASUREMENT

69

MEASUREMENT ON TRACE

l_o_aR 3.---Comparison

of measurement

lary cavity by micrometer

directly

of the medulon the film and

from the microdensitometric

trace. Since the med-

ullary cavity measurement

by micrometer

tends to be

slightly smaller than the true value, the apparent

cortical gerated

thickness

tends to be systematically

exag-

as compared

to measurements

made on the

microdensitometric

trace.

There is justification,

therefore,

for using the microdensitometric

place of on-film caliper micrometry.

trace in

REPORTING

CORTICHL

THICKNESS

In discussing the various advantages and

disadvantages of the vortical thickness measure-

ment, there is the important question of how to

best report it. The averaged cortical thickness

(L+R/2)

corresponds most nearly to the wall

thickness of the theoretical tubular bone model.

The summed corticalthickness (L+R) corre-

sponds most nearly to the aluminum equivalent density measured at mid-shaft. A corticalarea

estimate (i.e, the total cross-sectional

area

minus the marrow area) should correspond to

the total bone material under the trace and, indirectly, to Frost's Absolute Bone Volume.

Trotter's comparison of cortical thicknesses on the femur to the total bone weight (Trotter,

1954) and our comparison of estimated cortical volume to Garrow's measurements of bone rain-

eral (Garnet

al., 1965) reflect the extent to

which the periosteal diameter, or total diameter,

and the cortical thickness together reflect the

amount of bone that is there.

Various workers have expressed these raw dimensions in various ways. Under the assumption that the cortical thickness represents the wall thi:ckness and is the only measurement subject to change in adults, we have reported _urh_l _um_less _mne. Nordln L196u^,'"1965) and others express the vortex as a ratio, as a

percentage of the total periosteal diameter.

Some workers have expressed vortical area as a

percentage of the total periosteal area. With

age, all of these measurements

decrease except

total periosteal diameter and all ratios involv-

ing the cortex decrease.

Periosteal diameter

does not change appreciably after adulthood.

While changes in the cortical diameter and the

marrow cavity are necessarily reciprocal, it is the cortex that changes, and all measurements or ratios derived from the cortex are "derivative."

The averaged cortical thickness (L+R/2)

and the summed cortical thickness (L+R) are

the same measurement.

The cortex-to-total

ra-

tio is heavily weighted by cortex, and the cortical area to total area ratio is primarily weighted by cortical area. We have compared various

measurements and ratios involving the cortex as

shown in table IIL The correlations among the

various raw measurements

and ratios confirm

the expectation that ratios containing the same values as numerator or denominator are heavily correlated, the correlations in this case meaning

that they effectively say the same ,thing.

TaSL_ III.--_ompa_ison

o/Methods

of Ezpressinó

the Bony Cortex Measurement

males aged _5.0-$_3)

(in 61 whAte

Cortical thickness

Cortical ratio

Cortical area

Cortical srea ratio

Cortical Cortical Cortical Cortical

thickness

',,_..........................................

ratio b ................................................

area ..................................................

area ratio __ ...........................................

O. 76

O. 40 --. 12

0.64 Ę 88 .11

Ę Sum ofleftand rightsides. b Corticaldiamete_/perloetedailameter. Ę Cortical axea/perlos_eal area

70

DEVELOPMENT O F METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

-.

FIGUR4E.--Evidence that the radiographic density of metacarpals primarily resides in the cortex of t h e shaft. For a series of 10 metacarpals, 5 of which are shown here, "before" and "after" densitometric traces are substantially identical, despite removal of medullary material in the proximal half of each shaft. Densitometric traces of metacarpal #6 and #7, made along the paths indicated by the dotted lines, show no more
difference than can be attributed to slight differences in repositioning. Accordingly, the cortex contains the preponderance of radio-opaque material in the metacarpals a t mid-shaft.

Ę CORTICAL THICKNESS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

MICBODENSIT01VIETRY

IN BONE LOSS MEASUREI_E_'T

71

We continue to favor the averaged or summed cortical thickness. The cortex is the

active parameter and the parameter that changes in osteoporotic bone loss in tubular bone. There would be justification for reporting the cortical area corresponding to the Absolute Bone volume; and this may be desirable in tubular bones that approach the theoretical

bone model in being (a) circular, (b) concentric, etc. The metacarpals are more or less circular, the width being 116% to 130% of their depth at mid-shaft. For other bones, whose circularity is not certain, as in most tubular

bones, or where the antero-posterior view alone

loses some of the bone materials (as in the

femur), the computed cortical area does not add

additional information.

In the case of the

femur, where the large pilaster of the linear aspera contains much bone and yet is not reflected in the thickness of the lateral and medi-

cal cortex, cortical area computed from the antero-posterior view alone is erroneous.

Relating cortical thickness to the total periosteal bone diameter is useful only if there is a relationship between the two. We might expect the bigger bone with the larger periosteal diameter to have a thicker cortex. In children

and subadults, individuals with the larger
periosteal diameter generally have greater cortical thickness as well. In adults the relation-

ship between total diameter and cortical thick-

ness within an age group and for a given sex and a single population is far from high. We prefer to measure and report cortical thickness per se since it best reflects the actual bone.

Other expressions, including cortex as the per-

centage of total, or cortical area as a percentage of total area, will be highly correlated with cor-

tex except that derivative ratios or ratios of areas then introduce errors and uncertainties, especially as the bone section departs from circularity.

DISADVANTAGES THICKNESS

OF CORTICAL

As with radiographic densitometry, where fall-off of density from the center introduces errors of a major order of magnitude, and

where processing variables (including streak-

ing), fog, and soft tissue correction introduce

multiplicative problems that have not been fully

resolved, cortical thickness measurements have their limitations. Cortical thickness measure-

ments cannot be applied to bones that are pri-

marily spongy. Some of the finger bones fall

in this category, the cortical portion of the

morphologically variable middle segment of the

fifth digit being very small and highly variable.

Also the weight-bearing tubular first metatar-

sal bone falls in the latter group; there is too

little cortex remaining to measure in older sub-

jects.

Positioning may constitute a problem. It is

difficult to malpostion the postero-anterior foot

or hand views unless an oblique view or a ro-

tated view has been intentionally ordered, and

although a postero-anterior lower leg view may

be reasonably "standard," variability in posi-

tioning may be too great for reliable measure-

ment of other body parts. Medial rotation or

lateral rotation of the lower leg can make suc-

cessive X-rays of the same subject uncompar-

able. In analyzing bone loss in fracture cases

seen at the Springfield City Hospital this year,

replicability in positioning has been a most dif-

ficult technical problem. The immersion-

positioning procedures for the forearm, used

by Meema (1963) and Meema and Meema

(1963), or the standardized forearm views em-

ployed at the Fels Research Institute are rec-

ommended. The less a bone approaches a

simple cylinder in cross-section, the more posi-

tioning error contributes results.

to unsatisfactory

The cortical thickness measurement may account for only a part (the greater part) of the

mineral content of the bone_ Some part of the mineral of the bone resides in the spongy cen-

ter. In the metacarpals, the cortical bone (with its very hiffh physical and radiographic density) ordinarily acz_unts for more than 90% of the bone mineral in the bone. This appears to be true of the femur at mid-shaft as well.

The extent to which the cortical area of any bone represents the major portion of the bone mineral may easily be ascertained by the empir-

72

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DEN_ITOMETRY

PATHS AND POINTS TRACED

0.12

Ę 0.04 Ę 0.04

9H
FIXED CONE

Ę 0.02

0.08

Ę 0.02 Ę

0.06 0.02

Ę 0.02 0.00

0.00

0.05

0.06

0.15

Ę

oA "oA "

Ę 0.04

Ę 0.10

Ę

Ę 0.08

Ę 0.12

Ę

Ę 0.14

Ę 0.14

b

Ę 0.14

0.34
0.20 Ę

0.08 Ę 0.08 Ę 0.04 Ę

ADJUSTABLE CONED DOWN

0.05 0.00 Ę

0.00 Ę

0.24

0.08

0.00

0.00

0,12

0.05

Ę

Ę

Ę

Ę

0.00

0.02

0.05

Ę 0.05 Ę

0.05 Ę

0.02

0.05 Ę

0.14

Ę

0.08 Ę

C

0.12o

Ę 0.40 0.30
0.20

Ę 0.15 ADCJOUNSETADBLEUP Ę 0.28 Ę 0.08 Ę 0.00 Ę

0.02

0.30

0`10

0.15

0.05

0`00

0.00

0`00

ODC

Ę 0.00

Ę

Ę 0.05

0.00

Ę 0.10

dĘ

Ę 0.18

0.05

FIGURE 5.--Fall-off

density from the film center shown for different cones and degrees of coning-down.

Here,

comparing

a 9-inch fixed cone and a large adjustable

rectangular

"Collimator"

cone, it is obvious that fall-

off of radiation

from the central spot constitutes

densitometry,

with aluminum-equivalent

density

a major gradients

potential

source of error in radiographic

micro-

as high as 0.40 mm (corresponding

to as much

as 0.80 mm of cortex).

Under these circumstances

it is most inadvisable

to make densitometric

compari-

sons of radiographic to keep the reference

films produced wedge within

under a variety a short distance

of field and clinical situations of the bone site to be traced.

and it is most desirable

░ _ORTICAL

THICKNESS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

MICRODENSITOMETRY

IN BONE LOSS MEASUREMENT

73

ical approach we have employed, using dry bone_ or by comparing cortical thickness measurements and density traces of the same bone.

ERRORS

IN THE DENSITOMETRIC

APPROACH

Errors in cortical thickness measurement are

of two distinct kinds: random, as exemplified

by the R__S mea_____nng errvr, and syg_ematic,

as shown by the comparison of measurements

taken directly from the densitometric

trace

with those obtained by caliper micrometry of

the same tubular bones. Systemati% also, are

errors due to over- or under-estimation

of the

true cortical area when only a single radiographic view is used, Random errors amount

to 2%-5% for the second metacarpal and may

be proportionately

smaller for larger bones

with thicker cortice_

Systematic errors may

be ignored in certain of the applications or elim-

inated by not making area estimates from in-

adequate data. Measured today and remeasured tomorrow, a cortical width of 5.5 mm will be 5.5 mm ___ 0.15 nnn.

For the same bone, the second metacarpal,

and for comparable radiographs,

errors in the

densitometric

approach am of several kinds,

occasionally magnitude.

additive and in some cases of major One source of error is derived

from the falling-off of the X-ray beam density

from the central ray, a phenomenon due in part

to the cone and the degree of coning-down.

We

have studied this error extensively and find it

to be equal to as much as 4.4 mm of aluminum

at 10.0 cm from the central ray (see fig. 5). Expressing this error as an RMS error of ap-

proximately 0.2 mm of aluminum equal to ap-

proximately 0.4 mm of cortex, it may be of the

order of ▒ 10% in replicate measurements

in

the same second metacarpal and 20% or more

in comparison

to the aluminum equivalent

thickness of the middle segment of the fifth

digit. Visiting Meema's laboratory, we find

that he has attempted to minimize this source

of error by limiting the distance between refer-

ence wedge and the part being measured, knowing beforehand the extent of fall-off of radia-

tion under the circumstances

of his study.

A second error comes from processing streaks,

due to insufficient agitation, close proximity be-

tween adjacent films, streaking from film hold-

ers, etc. Such areas of reduced density may be

approximately equal to 0.4 to 0.5 mm of alumi-

num, or approximately

1.0 mm of cortex. We

have attempted to minimize errors due to proc-

essing variables of all kinds by the use of nitro-

gen-burst processing (Calumet Manufacturing

Company, Chicago).

Processing streaks from

all sources constitute a source of error. To

some extent they can be "edited" out when they appear in areas of maximum density. When processing density variations occur in the useful

area of the film (i.e., manus or pes), they may not be noticed.

A third source of densitometric

error arises

from the useful limits of a film-wedge combination; that is, when the optical density of the

most radioopaque

area of the wedge or body

part comes close to the minimum optical den-

sity of the film itself. Minimum densities of

p_

Kodak nonscreen film approximate

0.3, though they may be as high as 0.5. About

0.05 of the optical density is due to the film base

itself, 0.05 to the blue dye, 0.10 to processing,

and 0.10 to scatter.

The practical effects of

this are shown graphically in figure 6. As the minimum density of the image of the wedge

approaches relationship thickness calibration estimation

the residual fog level, the log-linear

between aluminum

equivalent

and optical density is altered. The

curve rolls off at this point and any

of an aluminum equivalent value of

bone "densi_" would be in error, in some cases

overestimating

the true aluminum equivalent

thickness by a substantial amount. The remedy

for this source of error is, first, technically main-

raining heavy enough exposures to pull the min-

imum wedge density above fog level; and, sec-

ond, to correct for it where this is feasible, as

shown in the figure_

Considering three sources of error, (1) that

due to fall-off density, (2) that due to process-

ing streaks, and (3) that due to calibration curve

curve roll-off, it should be clear why the RMS

error per aluminum

equivalent

thickness of

small tubular bones may be larger, far larger

than for simple measurement of cortical thick-

74

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENS_TOMETRY

Dmeos
J
_. "_.

ROLLOFF

OF

CALIBRATION

CURVE

DUETOFOGLEVEL

Z W

CORRECTED FOR FOG, "_,_

_J

ROLLOFFDIMIN,SHE" D

BUT STILL PRESENT
m

--_,D

O

o

WEI_,GE

TH IC,'óKNESS d

FmUR_ 6.--Showing

roll-off calibration

curve as the

minimum

optical density of the wedge approaches

fog density.

Where the useful limits of the film-

wedge combination

are exceeded, estimates

of alumi-

num equivalent

density may be seriously

in error,

contributing

major

errors

to radiogrammetrie

microdensitometry.

hess. They may be additive. While such errors

can be edited out to some extent by preliminary

quality control, they remain indeterminate

to

some extent.

minimal deviation from the usual radiographic

procedures.

NeiCher type nor processing

of

film are critical, and the equipment for cortical

thickness measurement

is simple and inexpen-

sive. For those bones that approach the theo-

retical tubular bone model, cortical thickness

measurements effectively and quantitatively

de-

scribe how much bone is there and how much

has been lost. Since the aluminum equivalent thickness per millimeter of young cortex and old

cortex appear to be the same, the meaning of

cortical thickness is both simple and direct.

Cortical thickness measurements

are not af-

fected by fall-off of illumination

from the

central ray, processing streaks or other proc-

essing errors, or deformation

of the calibration

curve--all of which can make for substantial

errors in densitometric

assessment.

However,

for spongy bones, including the vertebrae, for

tubular bones with little cortical material such

as the first metatarsal, and

the mandible, a densitometric

inescapable.

Densitometric

instances, yield the same

for flat bones such as

approach remains

trace can, in many

information

on size

obtained by micrometry ; and with due attention

to the anatomical meaning of the bone trace,

qualitative

as well as quantitative

information

on the sites of the bone loss may be obtained.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

SUMM./IRY

Study of many thousands of individuals

(infants, children, adults, and octogenarians), has shown that measurement of cortical thick-

ness is technically simple. It can be applied to

previously taken radiographs,

and it is par-

ticularly applicable to studies involving bone

change. A loss of as little as 5% of cortical

thickness may be measured reliably with total

cortical material exceeding 5.0 mm.

The absolute reliability of cortical measure-

ment is high (better than 0.98), the validity is good (exceeding 0.90), and the cortical measure-

ment effectively measures that which changes most in tubular bone, i.e, the cortex.

Cortical

thickness

measurements

demand

The present study was supported in part by

Grants AM-08955, DE-02194, FR-00292, and

FR-00537

from the National

Institutes

of

Health. We are indebted to Dr. Mildred

Trotter for permission to study the skeletal ma-

terial used in comparing the densitometric

and

micrometric suggestions

approaches. We appreciate the of Dr. B. E. C. Nordin and Dr.

R. W. Smith, Jr, particularly

in reference to

the meaning of cortical thickness, and the help of Philip Nolan, Jr, who measured thousands

of radiographs

of infants, children, and adults.

Ethel I. Hull, Dorothy Gross, and Aletta

Seehafer were most helpful in completing the

present paper, and Susan Campbell sible for many of the illustrations.

was respon-

I

o CORTICAL THICKNESS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

REFERENCES

MICRODENSITOMETRY

IN BONE LOSS MEASUREMENT

75

BARNETT, F__; and No_I_,

B. E. C.: The Radiologicsl

Diagnosis

of Osteoporosia

CHn.

RadioL, voL 11, 1960, pp. 166-174.

B_HAR,

M. ; ROHMANN,

ment in Children

C. ; WILSON,

D. ; VITm_, F. ; and G_ZN, S. M. : Osseous Develop-

with Kwashiorkor.

Federation

Proc., vol. 24, 1964, p. 338.

G_ZN, S. M. : The Genetics

of Normal Human Growth_

In: De Genetica

Medica, Luigi,

ed. Gregor Mendel Institute,

Rome, 1962.

GSJZN, S. M. ; ROHMA_N, C. G. ; and NOLAN, P., Jr.: Studies on the Development

of Com-

pact Bone in Normal Individuals

and in Endocrine

and Nutritional

Abnormalities.

_Depa__*_'ment of Orowt_ and C_metics_. Fets Research Institute,

Yellow Springs._ Ohio.

Privately

printed, 1963.

G_a_, S. M. ; PAo, E. M. ; and RmL, Science, vol. 143, 1964, pp. 1439-1440.

M. E.: Compact

Bone in Chinese

and Jalmnese.

G_,

S. M. ; ROHMANN, C. G. ; and NOLAN, P., Jr.: The Developmental

Nature of Bone

Changes During Aging. ed. Charles C. Thomas,

In: Relations

of Development

Springfield,

IlL, 1964.b.

and Aging, James E. Bitten,

GARN, S. _V[. : B_HAR, M. ; BOHMANN, C. ; VITERI, F. ; and WILSON, D. : Catch-up Bone De-

velepoment

GARN,

S. M.;

ment in

During Treatment

of Kwashiorkor.

Federation

Proc., voL 24, 1964, p. 338.

ROHMANN,

C. G.; and Guz_s_w, M. A.: Malnutrition

and Skeletal Develop-

the Preschool

Child. In: Prevention

of Malnutrition

in the Pre-School

Child, W. Henry SebrelL ed- Food and Nutrition

Board, National

Academy of Sci-

ences, National

Research

Council

Washington,

D.C., 1965.

GuzMX_, M. A. ; ROHMANN, C. ; FLORES, M. ; G_l% S. M. ; and SCHRIMSHAW, N. S. ; Os_eous

Growth

of Guatemalan

Children

Fed a Protein-Calorie

Supplement.

Federation

Proc., voL 24,1964, p. 33_

HEwrrr, D. : Sib Resemblance

in Bone, Muscle and Pat Measurements

of the Human Calf.

Ann. Hum. GeneL, vol. 22, 1957-58, plx 213-22L

MmSMA, H. E. : Cortical Bone Atrophy and _porosis

as a Manifestation

of Aging.

Am.

J. RoentgenoL,

vol. 89, 1968, pp. 1287-1288.

MEmIA, H. E.; and MEEMA, S. : Measurable

Roentgenologic

Changes in Some Peripheral

Bones in Senile Osteo_resia

J. Am. Geriat. Soc., voL II, 1963, pp. 1170--1182.

NORDX_, B. E. C.: The Relation

between Dietary

Calcium and Osteoporoeis

in Different

Parts of the World.

A Report to the Nutrition

Section of the World Health Or-

ganization.

Privately

printed, 1965.

ROHMANN, C. G. ; GARN, S. M. ; GUZM_,

M. A. ; FLORES, M. ; B_HAR, M. ; and PAo, E. :

Osseous Development

of Guatemalan

Children

on Low-Protein

Dicta

Federation

Prec., vol. 24, 1964, p. 338.

SMITH, R. W., Jr. : Osteoporotie

Changes in Bone Mass with Age. Presented

at the 92rid

Annual Meeting

of the American

Public Health Assoc., Inc., New York, 1964.

SMITH, R. W., Jr. ; and Fm_,

B. : Concurrent

Axial and Appendicular

Osteoporoeis:

Its

Relationship

to Calcium

Cxmsumption.

New Eng. J. Med. (in prese).

SMrrH, R_ W., Jr. ; and W_K_,

R. R. : Femoral

Expansion

in Aging Women: Implica-

tions for Osteoporosla

and Fractures.

Science, voL 145, 1964, pp. 156-157.

TROTTER, N.: A Preliminary

Study of Estimation

of Weight of the Skeleton.

Am. J.

Phys. Anthrop., voL 12, 1954, pp. 537-552.

VmTAMA, P., and M_HON_,

H. : Thickness

of the Cortical I_yer as an Estimate

of Min-

eral Content of Human Finger Bones.

Brit_ J. RadioL, vol. 33, 1960, pp. 60-62.

COMMENTS

Dr. U_ST. With regard to usefulness

of coa_ical

thickness

measurements,

I would like to know what is

the _iologic variability

of the thickness

of the cortex

in ten adult fenmles, glove size 7, 5 feet 5 inches tall,

or in any other standard Dr. G*uN. We have

model ? completed

studies

involving

mesns, standard deviations,

etc., for a complete range

of ages from age 1 through the 7th and 8th decades, in

both sexes. With the very kind help of Dr. Trotter on

Missouri

Negro skeletons,

we have completed

such

studies also on a pilot series of Japanese and Chinese.

We have completed

such studies also on close to 2,000

children,

so far, in Guatemala

means and the standard

deviations

We have here the for cortical thick-

ness, we have the partial correlations,

pertiaUy worked

out for relationships

between cortical thickness

and

76

DEVELOPMENT

OF 1VIETHODS IN BONE DEN_ITOMETRY

what is more important,

length of that individual

bone

rather than total size. We also have explored,

since

our material

very nicely comes within

families,

the

extent of genetic

determination

or apparent

genetic

determination

of cortical thickness,

medullary

cavity

thickness, evidence

and total periosteal also for cross-Unked

diameter.

There is some

inheritance

of cortical

thickness,

based on sister-sister

correlations

as com-

pared to sister-brother

and brother-brother,

and based

on father-daughter son, mother-son,

correlations

compared

to father-

and mother-daughter

correlations.

Dr. URIST. I think this is the critical question,

be-

cause in your control of race, you have an excellent

point; this is important,

as Dr. Trotter has shown in

her classic study.

I am asking for matched

cases.

Whether

or not you can compare

one patient

with

another and come up with an answer that merits this

wonderful

degree of precision

upon whether or not they are

Dr. GXR_. Individuals

who

that you have matched cases. have more :bone

depends to start

with end up with more bone, even if the percentage

loss

is the same.

Some ladies in our study start out in

their late twenties

at different

points

trum, and with the same percentage

in the bone specloss, end up at

very different

points in the bone spectrum.

We can

show you individual

rate losses for women, over a 30-

year period, and this is the second factor.

Ió does

appear to us that there is a point below which the

structural

integrity

the point at which

of the bone is impaired.

the fractures

occur.

This is

How much bone the person had earlier and how much

he has lost, which is then of major metabolic

im-

portance to the understanding

of bone loss, can be sepa-

rate from the purely mechanical

considerations

which

suggest that after a woman has a second metacarpal

cortex reduced below 2 ram, that bone, the other bones

in her hand, the round bones in her hand, and the other bones in the woman are failing to continue their

mechanical

integrity.

Dr. URIST. Have you answered my question : What is

the biologic it was?

variability

? What percent would you say

Dr. GAR_. Women in the mid-twenties

and mid-

thirties

(this is 153 women)

have a mean of 5.4 with

a standard deviation e_cient of variability.

of 0.8, that is, roughly In the osteoporotic

at 16% coage group,

for women in their 7th decade and ,beyond, we have a

mean of 3.7 with a standard

deviation of 0.7.

Dr. NORDI_. YOU should beware of taking a measure-

ment like this and saying: Does this or does this not

tell me if a patient has osteoporosis way to look at this measurement.

? This is not the This puts into

quantitative

terms the amount of cortical bone present

in a particular

bone of the hand. There is a lot of evi-

dence to show tha_ this generally

correlates

with other

bones in the skeleton,

but this is really a novel issue.

In rheumatoid

arthritis,

for instance, cortical thick-

ness won't correlate

with the rest of the skeleton.

It

will just give you a measurement

of the rheumatoid

changes

in .the hand. Instead

of looking at the hand

and arguing

as to whether or not this hand is osteo-

porotic,

you can now look up the reference

standards

of Garn, Nordin, or anybody you like, and you can say

this hand is outside the 95% limits of normality

for

this age.

Dr. Unlsw. The purpose of all this is to determine

how

much bone there is in the body. If this is a true index

of the total bone mass, that is very fine. It would cer-

tainly _be an easy way to determine

it, but if there

is a wide biologic variation

from one patient

that should be taken into consideration.

to another

Dr. NORDII_. Nobody has yet been able to correlate

cortical thickness

with total bone mass, except perhaps

in a few skeletons,

but, in general,

the variability

between different hones is substantial.

Broadly speak-

ing, bone mass diminishes

with

women, and this 'bone diminishes

age, particularly

in

with the rest, but

there are a tremendous

number of exceptions

to this.

In some people, the femoral cortex goes before the

hand, in others, the hand goes before the femur.

In

most, the spine goes before either have got to accept the measurement

of them, and you with the limita-

tions that it possesses.

Dr. GARN. Dr. Trotter pioneered

in the studies re-

lating the _bones of the skeleton to each other and deter-

mining in skeletal

material

which bone was most pre-

dictive. extent,

One can ex.trapolate

from her data to some

and since then she has compared

cortical thick-

nesses of the femur to other parameters.

Our group

has compared that of other

the cortex of the second metacarpal

to

bones of the hand, arm, leg, and foot.

Dr. Nordin and Dr. Smith, in turn, have compared

various approaches

to simple cortical

thickness

of the

hand to bone loss in the central

skeletal

mass.

We are well along in deciding whether

we have aP-

proaches

that can be clinically

useful, useful in popu-

lation surveys, and useful--and

I think this is the most

important

thing--in

measuring

how fast _bone is ,being

withdrawn

from a particular

individual,

and what the

nutritional,

metabolic,

and activity correlates

of these

are.

Dr. NORDIN. This is absolutely

true, but if you look

at Dr. Trotter's

interesting

and excelIent

work, the

actual

predicted

value of the femoral

cortical

area

carries

an error of -----30%. When you consider

that

we are particularly

interested

in the loss of .trabecular

bone (which constitutes

perhaps

something

like 5 or

10% of the skeleton)

and when you think that we are

interested

in situations

in which you may have lost

perhaps 20% 2% of your mass which

of your tra,becular

bone (which

skeleton),

then an estimate

carries

a predictive

precision

is perhaps of cortical
of ▒30%

is quite meaningless

in terms of trabecular

bone. I

don't want to decry the measurement.

I was one of the

first to introduce

it, but I want to emphasize

its

limitations.

Its limitations

are that you are measuring

the metacarpal

of the hand, and it so happens

that

░ CORTICTAHIL_SS

AND RADIOGRAPHIC

MICRODENSITO_[ETRY

I_ BO_ LOSS MEASUREMENT

7_

then it broadly correlates

with other bones,

You must

not take it beyond

that, for it certainly

is not suffi-

ciently sensitive

to replace some measurement

of tra-

becular bone. Dr. WHZDON.

I want

to re-emphasize

generally

the

statement that Dr. Nordin has just made. I think there

is such a difference

in the function

of the two major

classes of bone, trabocular

versus cortical, that to at-

tempt to go a long way with precise measurements

of cortical bone is to be riding on the wrong horse,

as far as determining

what happens to changes in cal-

cium stores in a skeleton as they appear

creasingly

common disorder, osteoporosis.

in the in-

Dr. TEOTTE_ I agree with all of yo_ I think there

are these variations

from skeleton to skeleton, but in a

series of aged skeletons, I found significant

correlations

in loss of bone among ten series of sets of bone from

each skeleton.

The skull was omitted because it was

too irregular, and the hip bone was omitted.

But for

the 10ng limb bones, the vertebral column in segments

(cervical,

thoracic,

correlation_

lumbar,

and sacral), there was a

{ h: 7673

The Interrelationship Between Bone Density and Cortical Thickness in the Second Metacarpal as a Function
gAge

Niwota_oN WOL_,_SFJ with the collaboration of JAMESEArN The Department of Growth and Genetics, Fels Research Institute

This paper reports on an attempt by the author to investigate the mineral content of bone cortex in relation to its thicknes_ We assumed
that this content changes with ago and varies aanong individuals of the same ag_
Mineral content, which is important for the study of nutrition and of metabolic diseases such as osteoporosis and osteomalacia, has so far been measured in rive in terms of bone density or of cortical thickness of a given bone (Garu et al., 1960; Garn, 1962). Cortical thickness probably correlates with the volume of the bone, which does not seem to be equivalent to the quantity of minerals inside the bones either histologically or biochemically.
Bone density is doubly inaccurate. First of all, what was sometimes measured was not bone density alone but rather the total density of bone and soft tissue. This is of dubious values since soft tissue may vary in thickness at the point which is being measured as well as in the percentage proportions of marrow, water, and other materials. The recent paper of Baker, Mack, Shiner, Vose, et al., involves cotTeetion for soft tissue.
Secondly, even if one considered bone density alone without soft tissue, the aluminum wedges or steps used as equivalents for the measure might vary in the composition of the metal, which might not be sufficiently pure chemically.
For these reasons, we developed a new method for the investigation of the problems. This

method is similar to Mainland's (1963), with which we became familiar only after our research was finished.
METHOD
X-ray pictures of the left hand were taken with the machine at Fels Research Institute on Kodak nonscreen film made especially for the investigation of bone density. The second metacarpal of the left hand was analyzed.
Cortical thickness was measured with an especially modified pin-point caliper. First we measured bone thickness at the thinnest point of the shaft of the second metacarpal and then the width of the medulla at the same point. Cortical thickness is the difference between these two dimensions. While this measure actually represents double the cortical thickness, it is well suited for comparison with bone density. Our measurements were exact to 0.01 ram.
The thinnest part of the second metacarpal was chosen for measuring both cortical thickness and bone density, because this part is comparable in different individuals, particularly from the point of view of structure, whereas the center of tim bone is not. Density was measured at midpoint between the lateral walls of the bone.
Density of tissue was defined by the optical density on the film. To determine it, we used a Weston Photographic Analyzer and a scale with
79

8O

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENS_ITOMETRY

a range from 0 (0 optical ray obsorption) to 3

MFD, SD, TD and TDsr were all meas-

i

(total absorption). It'is i'n_portant to note that

ured in our study. TD was measured

on film the relationships will be the reverse of

at the point already mentioned, namely,

the real ones, that is, where X-ray absorption is,

the thinnest part, midpoint of bone thick-

in fact, the highest, film optical density will be

ness, and TDsr was taken at the same

the lowest, and vice versa.

height, midpoint between the second

Optical density measured in this manner de-

metacarpal and the third.

pends on the following factors : 1. The true density of tissues (or whatever
other materials are used for comparison) being X-rayed;
2. X-ray exposure technique, i.e., the amount of X-ray energy used, exposure time, distance between machine and negative, etc. ;
3. Film development technique (chemicals

After all the measurements were collected,

we attempted first of all to eliminate the film

fog factor. This was done by subtracting

MFD from TD (TD--MFD), ( TDsr-- MFD) .

and from TDsr

Since our goal was to find bone density, we

applied the following formula:

used and their temperature, the presence of air bubbles while the film is being rinsed), secondary radiation, etc. ;

CBD (corrected bone density) = (TD-- MFD) --k(TDsr-- MFD),

4. Film density itself, that is, the density of the film-base and emulsion: minimum film den-

where k=

sity, fog; 5. Foreign objects or materials present be-

soft tissue thickness at the point examined total hand thickness at the point examined

tween the X-ray machine and the film (e.g., aluminum filtration, paper cover of the nonscreen film, etc.). When Kodak nonscreen film is used, their presence is minimal.
The following symbols were used as explained b_low :

In the given case, total thickness at the point examined is the distance between points on the palm and the back of the hand above and below the measured point on the second metacarpal. The value of k may vary between 0.1 and 0.9. We used the value of k--0.75 realizing that this

MFD SD

(Minimum film density--fog)--film

den-

sity at a point shielded by a 20 mm lead

plate, i.e., where no X-rays could reach

the film. Thus, this density is dependent

on the quality of the film. In this paper

we used only about 4 mm lead plate.

(Standard density)--film density at a

point shielded by 4 mm plate of alumi-

num, i.e., where X-ray absorption rate

would remain the same regardless of

exposure techniques used. Thus film

density at this point would depend on

factors listed under 2, 3, and 5 above, as

well as 4 (MFD). In this paper we used

a plate of alloys of known compositions of aluminum.

value changes with age; particularly it is different in children under 5. This is a better calculation of "k" for each subject (measurement of hand thickness using anthropological caliper).
The above procedure eliminated to some extent the influence of soft tissue (skin, subcutaneous fat tissue, muscle, ligaments, marrow, etc.). This elimination was not complete, since, thickness being equal, even soft tissue varies in density as, for example, in the proportion of subcutaneous fat tissue to muscle, etc. Still, it was a step forward.
Figure 1 shows changes in bone density thus corrected (CBD), by age. But there were other influences at work here as well, namely, those

TD (Total density)--film

density at the

point examined. This would be ex-

pressed as TDsr when measured below

in no way related to hand tissues but rather to the techniques used in developing the X-ray film. In order to eliminate those, we used the

the soft tissue, and as TD below both the soft tissue and the bone.

measure SD (standard density (SD - MFD ).

density)

minus film

INTERRELATIONSHIP

BETWEEN

BONE DENSITY

AND CORTICAL THICKNESS

81

-,░

weight of these metals, and therefore, higher

absorption.

Figures 1B and 1D show the values of

CSTD-N

and CBD-N.

t-,o

-",:Er

Jo

--

i

'!

o

tlo I

I

I

I

I

I

AGE

IN YEARS

Fm_mE L--Changes

by age in second metacarpal

cor-

tical thickness

(A), corrected

normalized

soft tissue

density rected

(B), corrected

bone density

(C), and cor-

normalized

bone density

(D) in men and

women at the ages of 2 to 74 years.

The points

represent smoothed.

arithmetical

means ; the curves

are

By dividing the results obtained by SDMFD we get values independent of technique as follows:

a. Corrected soft tissue, normalized:
TDsr--MFD CSTD--N-----

b. Corrected bone density, normalized:

CBD--N_-

CBD IO0
SD--MFD

When the above method is used, all results

can be compared with one another, on one con-

dition_ namely, that a 4-mm aluminum plate is

used for finding SD. One could, however, use

chemically pure metal, an easily obtainable

metal sample such as silver or gold (or chemi-

cally pure aluminum),

conforming to some in-

ternational

agreement.

One would then need

thinner plate because of the greater atomic

DISCUSSION

OF RESULTS

We took the above measurements

from 176

male and 153 female subjects_ ranging in age from 2 to 74 years. All subjects were permanent residents of southern Ohio (region near Yellow Springs).
Figure 1 shows the smoothed curves formed

by the arithmetical means of the values under

discussion, namely, cortical thickness (CT), soft

tissue density between the second and third

metarcarpal

(CSTD-N),

and bone density at

the point described, on the second metacarpal

( CBD and CBD-N).

As we see from figure 1A, cortical thickness

increases at a particularly

fast rate between 3

and 20 years of age. Bones are thickest at about

24 years of age in women and 28 in men. After

that we observe a decrease in cortical thickness

(bone loss). From puberty on, bone cortex in boys is thicker than in girls. This may be related to the boys' taller stature, hence larger bones. We did not calculate cortical thickness

in relation to bone length. Soft tissue density (CSTD-N),
decrease at under 10 years of

after some age, increases

rapidly until the ages of 20 to 23 (fig. 1B). Then it again decreases rather quickly at about 28 years of age in men and about 35 in women. After that it remains at a more or less steady

level. Women between 15 and 27 years old have

higher soft tissue density than men; later in life the reverse is true.

Unadjusted

bone density

(CBD)

varies

greatly from the corrected, particularly

as the

two sexes (CBD-N)

are compared.

This can

be understood easily if we keep in mind that in

X-ray examination X-ray dosages vary depend-

ing on hand thickness.

These differences are

adjusted through the SD-MFD

technique.

Corrected bone density, CBD-N

(fig. 1D),

increases rapidly between the ages of 3 and 2'2

years_ and more slowly up to about 30 years of

age. After that it begins to decrease slowly but

82

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DEN_ITOMETRY

░░

steadily in men, and slightly more rapidly in

women, particurlaly

after the age of 50, i.e, in

the postmenopausal

period.

Up to approxi-

mately 20 years of age, bone density is higher

in boys than in girls, between 20 and 55 it is

greater in women than in men, and vice versa

once more, above that age.

THE INTERRELATION

OF BONE DEN-

normalized index CBD-N, the following formulae:

obtained

CBD
Index CBD-=IO ._ CT

through

Index CBD-N=.

CBD-N GT

SITY TO CORTICAL

THICKNESS

Clear differences

are descernible

between

In order to evaluate bone density with relation to cortical thickness, we used an index of corrected bone density (index CBD), and a

CBD and CBD-N

(fig. 2). We shall use index

CBD-N

for analysis.

As we can see (fig. 2B) up to 25 years of age

bone density in subjects of either sex increases

rapidly with respect to cortical thickness.

It

-14

decreases between the .ages of 25 and 37.

o

Further increase in density can be observed be-

tween the ages of approximately

37 to 50 in

-10,2!

men, for whom it then remains on a steady level, and between about 37 .and 48 years of age in

/_/ "oĘ

/5

s

░//

women. In women from about 50 on, relative

bone density decreases rather rapidly.

To com-

iiipare between the sexes, the changes are similar for both up until about 50 years of age, although rela.tive density, as expressed by the CBD-N index, is consistently higher in men. From 57

years on, during the postmenopansal

years in

/I

o

-4oo

,

women, their relative bone density becomes

0N

lower than that of men.

t-.

This phenomenon shows up with particular

clarity on a scattergram of correlations of cor-

tical thickness to bone density (CBD-N),

as

o -200 t-

illustrated in figure 3.

i-IO0
I

o

!

m

!

We see a fairly regular rate of growth of cortical thickness and bone density with age, from 2 to about 27-34 years in men, and between 28 and 31 years in women. The parallel lines

I--

indicate greater thickness in men than in wo-

men of the same age but greater density in

-

m:

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

0 I 0 20

50

40 50

60 70

AGE IN YEARS

FIGURE 2.--Changes

by age in the relative bone density

of the second metacarpal,

expressed

as the index of

corrected

bone density

(A), and the index of cor-

rected women

bone den.sity at the ages

normalized

(B),

of 2 to 74 years.

in men and The points

represent

arithmetical

are smoothed.

means;

deveIopment

curves

wome_l.
Of special interest, however, are changes occurring after maximum density (CBD-N) has been achieved. These are different for each sex.
In women, the process consists of a rather sharp decline in bone density and a slow decline in cortical thickness. Thus, while differences exist in rates of change, their direction is generally the same. The process runs a slightly different course in men. Their cortical thickness remains

INTERRELATIONSHIP

BETWEEN

BONE DENSITY

AND CORTICAL

THICKNESS

83

-8O

-70
-eo
o
' -50

59
O_

laJ
E3
-30 -
z o
m -20 -

-I0 -

░

u

I,,u

t"

6

=:: 0 -

so

o

u

*4

I

I

I

I

I

I

0

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

CORTICAL

THICKNESS

(ram)

FZGUgB 3._A scattergram

of the cortical

thickness

(CT) and bone density

(CBD-lq)

of the second

metacarpaL

Points represent

arithmetical

means

for given age groups.

The course of the curve is

semi-schematic.

the same even after bone density has begun to decrease. This happens between about 34 to
38 years of age, after which the decrease in cortical thickness is accelerated while bone density remains on a steady level.

CONCLUSIONS
It appears that the method presented allows for a more exact examination of the process of bone mineralization in rive. Of particular significance may be the analysis of cortical thickness (GT) and bone density (GBD-N) from a scattergram. The method appears to be particularly apt for the diagnosis of cases of osteo-

porosis as opposed to osteomalacia, as well as other diseases of bone metabolism, e.g., frag//_is

vssiurn_ oste_tis fibrosa cyst_ca generalisata. It may be particularly useful in distinguishing between cases of disturbances of protein metabolism and those of calcium-phosphorus metabolism.

Many aspects remain unexplained, such as

the different course of changes in men and wo-

.... _*_-*_ ....

_ to 30 t_ 3) and

particularly the differences in direction of

change in bone density (CBD-N, fig. 1D) in the postmenopausal period, that is_ when there is a lack of estrogen.

For explanation of this phenomenon, one would have to resort to a histochemical and

microanatomical examination of bone tissue.

There may be differences in changes that are microstructural in nature, as those in the chemical composition of bone tissue.
It would also be of interest to evaluate the

evidence that there are two periods of particu-

larly high bone density (index CBD-N), the

one occurring at about 25 years of age--which

is probably the period when progressive bone

development comes to an end--and the other

at about 48 years of age in women and about 55 in men, which may be the time when intensive bone calcification comes to an encL

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research for this paper was conducted by the author while engaged in postdoctoral study. The author wishes to thank the National Insti-
tutes of Health for making this study possible; Dr. Stanley M. Garn and Dr. Bernard M. Wagner for their helpful suggestions in regard to the preparation of the manuscript; and Mrs. Irene Jerison for translating and preparing the manuscript.

REFERENCES

GARN, S. M. : An Annotated

Bibliography

tion, vol. 10, 1962, pp. 59-67.

on Bone Densitometry.

Am. J. Clin. Nutri-

84

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

GABN, S. M.; HARRISON, H. E. ; and MASON, K. E. (eds.) : Transcript

on Bone Densitometry

Held at the Stone House, NIH, December

Springs, Ohio, 1960.

MAIN_._ND, D. : X-Ray Bone Density

bank Memorial

Fund Quarterly,

of Infants

in a Prenatal

Nutrition

vol. 41, no. 4, 1963, pp. 1-106.

of the Workshop 4-5, 1959, Yellow
Study, The Milk-

COMMENTS

Dr. NORDIN. Dr. Wolanski

h,as made a very good

fundamental

point which I tried to raise this morning

with Dr. Schraer, bone densitometry

that is that the difference

and cortical

thickness

between was not

brought

out this morning.

One would want to know

what densitometry bone for cortical

tells one after

thickness.

There

correction

of the

are two different

things here. The amount of cortex in millimeters,

and

the quality or nature or density or whatever

it is, poros-

ity, within that cortex.

I think

that Dr. Wolanski

has brought

I am right in saying out this particular

point, which I think is of very considerable

interest and

which I think has not been touched on.

Dr. GARN. I think that many of us are interested

now in whether or not the aluminum

density equivalent

per millimeter

of cortical bone thickness

changes.

We

have examined

Trotter's

material.

this in part The question

again with now is this:

Mildred Is the

material

we measure

and report as cortex the same

material

from age 20 to age 70?

Dr. ARNOLD. Would an increasing

porosity

in females

to a greater extent than in males explain

other words, would this give you a decreasing

when normalized

to a cortical thickness?

this?

In

density

Dr. NORDIN. NO, it is the other way around,

understand

it. That is why I wanted Dr. Garn

as I to ex-

plain it to us, because it looks to me the opposite from

what we would expect.

As I understand

it, if Dr.

Wolanski

has done what he wanted to do, it is exactly

the opposite from what we would expect. Dr. GARN. I think, Dr. Nordin, that we are both be-

ginning to agree that men are losing bone as well as

women, and I think that, to some extent, which men lose bone has been underestimated

the rate at because

of the attention

given to women and their more severe

complaints. Dr. ARNOLD. That

has been the pathological

position

from the beginning, rate as women.

that men atrophy

at about the same

Dr. GARN. YOU see, if you would take one of these

estimates,

which none of us quite like to make, and ex-

trapolate

from the little bit of bone that we have all

started on (one little bone in the left hand), this ex-

trapolation

would indicate

that the amount

of bone

lost is as great in the male as in the female, whereas, of

course, we all know that the percentage

loss is greater

in the fenmle than in the male.

Dr. NORDrN. But that does not explain

this graph,

which suggests that the female has more density for

cortical thickness than the male.

Dr. Gxm_. This is something ported years ago for the middle

that Dr. Schraer

re-

section of the middle

segment

of the fifth digit, which has been ignored.

I

thought

he was totally wrong.

It did not make sense.

But when one considers

the total area, women with

smaller tubular bones have, for those smaller tubular

bones, more cortical area than men do.

material

in relationship

to the bone

Dr. NORDI_. In other words, the cortical material

it-

self is less porous in these women than in men. This

is a very remarkable

thing.

This is a paradox.

That

is why I was hoping a language

problem might

curred here and it might have been interpretable.

have oc-

Dr. SMITtI. Just to add to this point, we have made

observations

on density

of rib, subperiosteal

compact

bone, iliac compact bone, and femoral compact bone and

compared cylinders

them between

sections;

that

of known length and known

is, by taking

diameter

and

weighing

them to fractions

of milligrams.

We cannot

find significant bone in respect

differences

in actual density of compact

to this question between the sexes, when

age matched.

Dr. URIST. Assuming

that this observation

is true,

microradiography

of cross sections of the cortical bone

might show more interstitial

bone of greater density in

the female.

There is more calcium, there are calcified

osteocytes

and plugged up blood vessels, and this has

been interpreted

as a manifestation

of osteoporosis

as

a disease.

Whether

it is or not is another

question.

I think we are still on the subject, really, of physiologic

osteoporosis.

I don't

subject of the clinical

think we have gotten into the

problem,

but the answer might

be in a study of the microanatomy.

Dr. _VHEDO_ó. Dr. Smith, do you want to say anything with regard to the findings you have made with

respect to the expanding Dr. SMITIt. We have

cortical

diameter

with age?

not found expanding

cortical

diameter

with age in the second metacarpal,

as Dr.

Garn area,

has indicated,

measuring

in essentially

the same

but we do find it in the mid-shaft

of the femur.

I think this is one of the blessings

of having a simple

millimeter

scale that you can hold up to the X-ray,

and take direct measurements.

You can uncover this

very remarkable

gain of about 3.5 to 3.6 mm of external

diameter

gain at mid-shaft

femur, thus your presenta-

tion this morning

of providing

a ratio of cortical bone

to diameter, those bones

I think, may not be wholly valid for

wherein this phenomenon

is taking place.

In the metacarpal

I think this is true, and I am just

waiting

for Dr. Garn or someone else to confirm this

very interesting

phenomenon,

which

is quite sub-

stantial,

in the mid-shaft

of the femur.

OTHER METHODS OF DENSITOMETRY

Co_s'r_

J. MxzarrsKos, Chairman

I am going to make my remarks quite short in the interest of proceeding with today's session.
Yesterday we talked about X-ray densitometry which involved the physical measurement of transmission of electromagnetic radiation through matter. We have a variety of different kinds of electromagnetic radiation_ and today's session is going to examine some different aspects. Again_ it will be fundamentally a transmission measurement_ but sinc_ there will be a different situation_ there will be different problems arising. Perhaps there will be advantages and perhaps there may be disadvanCages. It might be possible, for example_ to make more direct corrections for tissue absorption than could be made by the method that was discussed yesterday.
The session today also includes the use of other physical agents which allow you to make such a measurement_ and one of the later papers will involve the technique of ultrasound. I think it is clear from yesterday's discussion that there are a number of variables in.volved in the
final assessment of this situation_ namely_ what has happened to bone under different circumstances. We have to consider bone size, bone density_ bone mass, and even bone composition_ and we have to consider this both from the
points of view of the mineral and of the organic matrix.
As we have our talks and discussions_ I think it would be well worthwhile bearing in mind that each person should try to be clear as to what he is referring. It unfortunately seems to me that we will have to have some informa-
tion on every aspect to really make a final assessment. The situation is more complicated than we would like it to be, but this is part of life.
We have other problems that are involved with respect to precision and accuracy. From a strictly research point of view_ we would perhaps like to have this situation be as accurate as

possible. From a clinical point of view_ we perhaps might not need this high degree of accuracy and precision_ and we should bear this in mind in our discussions. The clinician wants
to treat a sick person and make him well. The researcher wants to find out more about the mechanisms. We want to be careful that we do not apply the precision and accuracy to a situation of clinical use that would normally be applicable only to a research situation.
I would like to conduct the meeting as we did yesterday. I think this resulted in a lot of fun where there was much free discussion between
the speakers and the participants. Later on in the afternoon I would like to bring up the subject of linearization again to see if we can resolve that to almost everybody's satisfaction. It would be a great accomplishment if we could leave this meeting with everybody happy in this respect.
Finally_ since Dr. Jenkins has invited other thoughts in the measurement of bone density_ I would like to take a couple of minutes to tell you how the technique of neutron evaluation can be used in this field and to let you know that this technique does exist and is now in its infancy as to development.
Perhaps measurements of bone density could be made while man is in flight. It might be worthwhile thinking about this in the type of techniques that we have_ because this would be the ideal situation.
I personally think that neutron activation analysis might be the technique_ but there are other ways of doing it.
I would like to start now with the morning session. We are going to be discussing the technique of the use of isotopes. The first three speakers are going to be talking more or less on a similar subject_ looking at it from different points of view.

C. J. M.

Bone Mineral Measurement by Improved Photon
Absorption Technique

JoHN R. C_os

AND J_x_s A. SommoN

Departments of Radiology and Physics,

University of Wisconsin

The direct photon absorption technique for

measuring bone mineral content (Cameron and

Sorenson_ 1963) has been testext for reproduci-

bility of results and for reliability as an indi-

cator of actual mineral content. An improved

bone-scanning

system has been constructed for

_a v_vo measurements on humans, and a series of

experiments were performed to observe the

effects of v_rious instrumental

factors on the

measured mineral content.

Mazess et al. ( 1964 ) used _he technique on the tissue-covered bones of cadavers and obtained a correlation coe_cient of 0.96 between measured

bone mineral content and subsequently determined bone weights and ash weights. He con-

cludes that the technique is the most accurate

yet demonstrated for determining ,bonemineral

content in the presence of overlying tissue_

The technique was also used in a study of

dietary-induced

changes in bone mineral con-

tent in chickens, in the University of Wiscon-

sinPoultry Science Department (Mantilla etal.,

unpublished observations). In these studiesthe correlation coefficientbetween the measured

mineral content and subsequently determined ash weights was 0.95 and 0.99for measurements made in vivo and in _ro, respectively. All of these studies were dohe with the earlierscan-

ning appamtu_ The improved scanning system w_s used for
repeated measurements of the bone mineral content of the left radius of a normal 26-year-old male over a period of several weeks. The results are shown in figure 1. Each point repro-

! _+--_'-_

....... _ _"-:i " -4--:-4 .......... + '. --_

a22___ __.11; 2.!2 :__

__ 1.' :_:';2_.i'1;;;

15

_otnm l.--Results of repeated bone mineral determinations on a normal male. Each point is the average of 3 to 6 measurements.

sents the average of three to six consecutive

measurements.

The error bars indicate the

standard deviation of each _ The 1.3% stand-

ard deviation of these averages indicates the reproducibility of this system.

The improved system can be used for _ _'ivo

sca_

of such human bones as the radius, the

metacarpals, and the phalanges (fig. 2)- The device can akso be oriented to scan in a yertic_l plane and can be adapted for other bones_ such as the femur, os calcis, etc. The radioaeAive

photon source and de_r

ure mounted on a

turntable at a radius of about 9 cm. The scan-

ning motion is obtained by driving the turntable on its circumference with a slow speed

synchronous motor through a rack and gear system (fig. 3). The scan path is curved raVher than linear; but the increase in the apparent

87

88

WCMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENGITOMETRY

..

FIQTJB2.E-Improved scanning apparatus in operation.

FIQUR3E.-Photon source and detector on turntable.

..

BOXE MEVERAL MEASUREMX-W BY PHOTON BSORPTION TECHNIQUE

89

FIGUE4E.-Scanning apparatus showing m b b r tubing, cornprefmr plate, and arm holder.

width of the bone is less than 1%far diameters up to 2 cm.
To scan the radius. the forearm is p l a d in a wood and plexiglass holder. A rigid board running the full length of the forearm and a hand-grip, which can be placed at various distances from the Scan path, are used to obtain reproducible positioning (Q. 4). The part of the arm to be scanned is encircled with a &ion of 5;/,-inchdiameter flexible rubber tubing (Penrose drain), filled with a 2% solution of potassium sulfate. The tubing is then compressed between parallel pieces of plexiglass to provide a constant reproducible thickness of tissue, tissue equivalent, and bone throughout the scan. The compressed rubber tubing also helps to keep
the arm stationary. Vsing the 2% potassium sulfate solution, we obtained uniform absorp-
tion on both sides of the bone. Linear scanning speeds of 0.54, 0.79, and 1.58 mm/sec are pres-
ently a~ailableby changing drire gears. Typical scanning times are about 30 seconds, ushg

the 0.79 mm/sec speed. A 35-mc IlZ5photon source (27.3 keV) was
constructed for use with this sFstem. Twelve beads of Doves 1s 4 ion-exchange resin (20-50 mesh) were placed in a 1-mlsolution of carrier free radioactive iodine of 50 mc activity for about 4 hours. The beads were periodically remored from the solution to follow their increase in activity. The beads did not reach saturation during the 4 hours as indicated in figure 5. A more active source probably could have been made in the same time by starting with a solution of greater a c t i d y .
The radioactive resin beads were placed in
a 1-mm diameter x 12-mm deep hole in a brass holder. The bends filled the hole to a depth of about '7 mm. The photon beam is thus colli-
mated b j a 1-mm diameter x 5-mm deep aper-
ture. h single laj-er of 0.06-mm tin foil pn>\-ides beam softening filtration. Tin has its kabsorption edge at 29 keV and it preferentially absorbs the 31 and 35 keV components of PZ5.

90

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

6

.

E"~C~TJB5E.-Activity of resin beads in radioactive iodine solution.
The source is viewed end-on by the detector and has an effective cross section of 0.7 mm2.
The NaI (Tl) scintillation detector, 1-cm diameter x 2-mm thick, is mounted on a 1-inch photomultiplier tube. The output of the photomultiplier tube is sent to a pulse height analyzer and then to a ratemeter with a linearity of better than 1%. The output of the ratemeter is transmitted to a potentiometric m r d e r having 0.25% accuracy. Photon detection rates are read directly from the chart record. We use a ratemeter time constant of 0.3 second, with a linear scanning speed of 0.79 mm/sw. When the time constant is increased to 1.0 second, the measured bone mineral decreases by about 2%. Decreasing the time constant to 0.1 second does not have a significant effect on the measurements.
We plan to replace the ratemeter and chart recorder in our present system with a digital ratemeter and high speed printer in the near future. This will eliminate problems arising from the use of different ratemeter time constants and errors in reading the chart records. We expect our results to improve with this change. The digital ratemeter will also `be adapted for use with an electronic computer for rapid evaluation of our data.
We have performed a number of experiments to examine the effects of the soft tissues surrounding the bone on the measured mineral con-
tent. Glass slabs and test tubes were used to

simulate bone, and slabs of lucite t o simulate soft tissues. The 35 mc of IlZ5described above was used as a photon source. The detector was collimated with a ?&inch diameter x 1-inch long aperture in lead. The source to detedor distance was about 6 inches, which is typical for measurements on the radius.
With an analyzer base level of 25.3 keV and a window width of 4 keV, we measured the
"bone mineral content" of a glass $est tube (y2-
inch diameter with ?&-inch wall thickness) for various thicknesses of overlying lucite The %-inch lucite slabs were placed between the test tube and the photon detector. The results are shown in figure6. The measured "bonemineral content" varies by about 10% under these conditions.
We measured the absorption (IJI) of the 27.3
keV photon h a m in a X2-inch glass slab, for various analyzer base level and window width
I85
FIQUR6E.-Effect of lucite scatterers on measured "bone mass." Each scatterer is 4/2 inch thick.

.......... _" _ -
4_11i

,_i i'!i _ " M- _ J

J Ii

11tl,

II II

|. |

Fmu_

7. E_ect of lucite scatterers

on measured

at)-

sorption

for two analyzer

base level settings.

Im

( 27.3 keV ) photon source,

settings, in the presence of different thicknesses of overlying lucite scatterer. Figure 7 shows the absorption vs. number of 1/_-inch lucite thicknesses for two analyzer base levels. The absorption measurements were constant within statistical limits when the analyzer base level was set at 27.3 keV.
Figure 8 shows the apparent absorption in glass for different window widths, and a constant analyzer base level of 27.3 keV. A 2Ę inch thickness of lucite was present in these measurements,
The experiments illustrated by figures 5-7 were repeated for other relative positions of the lucite scatterers, e.g., for the lucite scatterers placed between the source and the absorber, The results were similar to, but not the same as,

F_

8. Effect of window

absorption,

with a constant

ers ( 2 inch total thickness).

width setting on measured number of lucite scatter-

those obtained for the original positions. This rulhs out simple correction factors based only on the knowledge of total thickness of the scattering medium, since the relative position of the absorber in the medium is also important.
The results of these experiments indicate that for accurate measurements of bone mineral content by the photon absorption technique it is necessary to use a pulse height analyzer, with carefully chosen operating condition_ For best results the analyzer base level should be about 27.3 keV, and the window width only a few keV. It is also important that these settings be the same to obtain reproducible results. (This work was supported in part by the USAEC, under contract number AT(11-1)-1422.)

792-955 _7

92

DEVELOPMENT
REFERENCES

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Ę░
o

CAMERON,

J. R. ; and SORENSON,

J. : Science, vol.

J. MANTILLA, S. BABCOCK ET AL. TO be published.

MAZESS, R. B. ; CAMERON,

J. R. ; O'CONNOR,

and

388.

442, 1963,
KNUTSEN,

p. 230. D. : Science,

vol. 145, 1964, p.

COMMENTS

Dr. MAL_rSKes.

Your detector does not move now?

Dr. CAMERON. Yes, the detector and source are on a

turntable.

They move around an arc. You might say

that is not a straight line, but the error there is less

than 1% for a diameter of up to 2 cm or so. It is an ex-

tremely small error and well within the accuracy

with

which we are trying to work.

Dr. MALETSKOS.

YOU chose

the turntable

because

you could get more drive that way?

Dr. CAMERON. It was chosen for simplicity.

This

screw drive, this split nut is a nuisance.

There is

some give between them. They are not as reproducible

as a good rack and gear system.

This system also is

easy for changing

speeds.

All we have on this is a

timer motor, all three different

gears.

We can put

other timer motors on other gears around the periph-

ery of this turntable.

Thus we can have a dozen differ-

ent speeds very easily.

Dr. MALETSKOS. HOW do you account for the fact that soft tissue is variable in terms of the effect you

get here, because

you have fat tissue and muscle

tissue involved.

Even though you are trying to get the

same thickness with your liquid device, the composition

of the tissue is changing from person to person.

Dr. CAMEROON. That is right. This is a limitation

of

the technique.

No technique

is perfect.

There are

problems and there are ways in which these things can

be improved.

Some of the data here is less than 1

month old. I think all of our recent data are new to

everybody

here. I want to emphasize

again that we

are working

a different

magnitude

and with a com-

pletely different system than we were with film. If

I were to show this in a more optimistic

method, I

would have left a zero there and showed practically

no change.

You have

that there is a physical

Dr. KLAPPER. Which

to exaggerate effect.
anatomical

it in order to see site did you use

with your technique? Dr. CAMEROn. We can use either

the right

or left

arm.

So far we have not gone beyond that. With this

faster scan, we have some animal experiments

using

the phalanx

and the second metacarpal

as well as the

radius and the humerus.

We can do anything

in this

general area and we can move dawn to the leg. We

can take the equipment and rotate it so that it rotates

across the thigh. For that research, we would prob-

ably use Americium

241 because there is higher energy

for the 60 keV photon.

Dr.
since

KLAPPER.

HOW

the technique,

do

you

as is also

achieve

reproducibility

true of the comparable

approach of Williams

and Odlum, is essentially

blind for

a relatively

large long bone? You would be able to re-

produce a small

positioning bone such

within a centimeter

or so, but for

as the middle segment of the fifth

digit or for the second metacarpal,

the positioning

error

is more of a problem.

Dr. CAMgRON. I would like to relay the answer to

that question to the Chicago group since they have a

very good system.

We have actually

isolated

it for

positioning

of the fingers well within a millimeter

for

their measurements

on the metacarpus.

We do not

throw the X-ray sets away!

We use X-ray films to

get positions.

We have not done this on our present

equipment, a fraction

but we will be able to X-ray and get within

of the millimeter

where we have taken our

record on an X-ray film. The source, which has the

same energy in Japan, Australia,

the United States, or

wherever,

is an excellent

simplification.

We had

many development

problems.

The detector

systems

are generally available.

A Picker magna scatter could

be modified to scan across the bone with this technique.

An attachment

takes actual measurements

across al-

most any bone, across the hip bone. There are a lot

of things to study on this technique.

I hope as a

result of this conference

there will be more people

working with it.

Dr. SCHRAEE. I personally

feel that the ultimate di-

rection of this whole area will be as Dr. Cameron de-

scribed it. I think it will be the only practical method

in the future.

I want to ask a few questions, however.

How much do you think equipment

like this will cost

to make commercially

?

Dr. CAMERON. I Would guess about $5,000, depending

on how fancy you want to be. The only thing you need

in many places is a mechanical

device.

Many places

have the pulse height analyzer

and recorders.

You

can get in the business cheaply if you have the Picker

scanner. Dr. GARN. There

is a firm in Knoxville,

I believe,

that has made several

complete

machines

for the

group at the University.

They are willing to make

more of them. It is completely

integrated

with the

Cracow equipment,

equipment

for moving either the

part or the scanner

uniformly

built in. It is about 3

BONEMINERAML _ASUREM_BNYTPHOTOANBSORPTITOENCHNIQUE

93

ft_long x 3 ft. wide.

Their first two machines,

I be-

lieve, cost about $10,000.

Dr. CAMERON. If yOU want to build your own, you can do it for a much smaller price.

Dr. RICH. There is one hesitation

I have about using

commercial

radioisotope

scanning equipment.

We have

found that the speed of the scanning device is not well

controlled.

In fact, the error runs around 8%.

Dr. CAm_gON. Yes, you would have to watch some of

these things.

I am not recommending

it. I am just

telling you what started_

you could

do if you wanted

to get

Dr. SCHRAE_ I think if you seIect bones where it is

not critical, you can go long distances

on a femur, for

example,

where you won't get much change.

If you

avoid areas like joints, it becomes

negligible.

For

joints it would be very important,

because you have

a sclerotic

area and a non-sclerotic

area, and if you

move a half millimeter,

you are in trouble.

I)r.

WHEI)ON.

_V'hat

you are showing

is reproducibil-

ity. This really has nothing to do with how much bone

is in the arm.

Dr. CAMERON. It has something

to do with it if the

human will let us take a slice of his arm, if we could calibrate it, or we could take another bone and use the

same thickness

of scatter, a dry bone, and put in a

phantom.

I would guess we could hit within absolute

units ; we could come within 3 or 5% in absolute units

of the amount of bone mineral there.

The greater er-

ror in this case is due to uncertainties

in composition

of the bone marrow, these other factors.

in fat versus muscle, and some of

Dr. SMITH. I Can see how you position the arm for

motion back and forth, but how do you avoid rotation?

Dr. CAMERON. If the arm is resting

there is relatively

little rotation.

across a bar,

Dr. BABCOCK. On a human great deal of difference.

radius,

it does not make a

Dr. CAMErOOn. It would have some difference because

of the size of the beam and so_)n.

The work that Dr.

Babcock will present used the older equipment.

I am

sure we can do somewhat

better on this newer equip-

ment_ This is designed mostly for human work, but it

can also be used for experimental

animals.

Dr. RICH. Do you anticipate plying this to vertebrae?

any possibility

of ap-

Dr. CAMERON. We have thought

of using it on the

head of the femur.

On the vertebrae it is a problem

worthwhile

looking into, but I think it would be diffi-

cult. There are more interesting

things to study than

vertebrae,

such as the thigh soft tissues.

Dr. I_NZL On Sorenson's arm are the vertical units,

your centimeters, Dr. CA_gON.

squared? No, it is more complicated

than that.

Basically

you can think of it as centimeters

squared on

a graph paper.

He actually does this numerical

inte-

gration, looks up the logs of the count, and records the

numbers from a chart.

He gets about 40 numbers and

he looks up their logs and integrates

the logs. In this

way he gets a number proportional

to the area on the

old system.

We no longer use a planimeter

Dr. LANZI_ In your scattering

experiments,

use glass?

as such. did you

Dr. CAMERON. Yes. We should ideally thing closer to bone, but we didn't expect

use someto see that

much change.

Maybe now we will go hack

with bone to see how much change there is.

Dr. LANZL YOU would attribute

this to

and do it a scatter

component?

Dr. CAM_ON. It is probably multiple scatter.

Mul-

tiple scatter is something

that is really difficult to

work with.

Single scatter is no problem at all. We

have analyzed that pert. When we get more than one

scatter of a photon, it gets pretty difficult analytically.

Dr. LANZL On the basis of this, would avoid this problem, which is not a sizable

you say to one, would

you think in terms of going to a smaller organ rather

than something

thick?

Dr. CAMERON. I think as long as you keep your thick-

hess continuous ; if there is an interesting

study to be

made of the femur, I think you should go ahead and

make it. If you have to take a greater 3%, you just take it, that is all.

error, say of

Dr. SCHRAE_ Could you do the alveolar bone with

your technique?

Dr. CAM_gON. I am pretty sure

anything.

We can get a protected

mouth and beam it out_

you can do almost source inside the

Quantitation of P._ze xv,,[-m._eYa 7 Measurement
in the Domestic Hen

Sn_vv2_ W. B_cocx AND JuAN MowrmI_ Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Veterans Administration Hospital, and Poultry Science Depmtment, University of Wisconsin

Pat_ I

The measurement of bone mineral content by the Cameron-Sorenson technique in,volves attenuation of a mono-energetic photon beam from 1125 by the interposed bone and detection with a scintillation counter (Cameron and Sorenson, 1963). As with any new technique, certain questions may arise concerning the parameter that is measured. Prominent among these are questions of accuracy, reproducibility, sensitivity, components of the measurements, and the possibility that the measurement is an artifact. Mazess eta]. (1964) have used this technique in human cadaver material and compared it with the weight of ashed bone segments. The correlation coefficient of these two measurements was 0.96. The present study was desi_maed to confirm and extend analysis of this parameter by the application to an experimental animal.
METHOD
The domestic hen was selected as a test animal for several reasons: It has a long, linear bone, the tibia, which is easily accessible; it has a very labile calcium metabolism ; and it will lie quietly without anesthesia for a moderate length of time. Measurements were made at a site 3 cm proximal to the tibio-tarsal joint of the left leg. The animal was placed in an adjustable holder with the left leg extended perpendicular to the scanning apparatus and the right leg held back parallel to the body. The wings were interlocked and held behind the back rest
with suitable weights. By covering the hen's

head with a dark cloth, it will lie quietly for periods of 30 minutes or more. The leg to be measured was held by rubber bands and modeling clay.
The measuring equipment was basically that originally described, with the following modifications: A thin tin filter was placed over the I m source which removes a large percent of higher energy radiation, as just described by Cameron; the scan was continuous and readout with a ratemeter and chart recorder rather
than interrupted for scaler read-out at 1-mm intervals; and the data were calculated by summation of the logarithms of values rather than plotted on semi-log paper with planimeter measurement of the area within the scan. The
leg was scanned four times without removing the animal, and the mean of these values was taken as a measurement. The standard deviation of these scans serves as a check on arithme-
tic errors as it seldom exceeds 3%, depending somewhat on source strength. Bone mass is expressed in operational units.

REPOSITIONING

ERROR AND

REPRODUCIBILITY

Measurements at various sites along the tibias of three hens are shown in figure 1. Values at corresponding sites on left and right legs are given and show fairly close agreement. The segment of bone from 3 cm to 5 cm proximal to the tibio-tarsal joint did not vary more than 5%. Hence, exact positioning for subsequent

95

96

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

measurements, introduce large more desirable

although

desirable, does not

amounts of error. It might be

to choose a site for routine

measurement 4 cm proximal than 3 cm, as there is greater the 4-cm site.

to the joint rather uniformity around

Reproducibility

was measured by sequential

measurements

at the 3-cm site in a hen, with

removal and repositioning instance each measurement

ten times. In this consisted of only

three scans. Figure 9 shows the ten values with

their individual

standard

deviations.

The

mean and range are given in the shaded figure;

the percent standard deviation for these ten measurements was 4.2%. Since an unusual de-

gree of fatigue due to the duration of measurement contributed to motion, this value is prob-

ably higher than ordinarily

encountered.

Source strength and number of replications

both contribute to this high figure.

ACCURACY
The accuracy of the measurement in a living system was evaluated by making 18 measurements at various sites along both left and right tibias of four hens in vivo. Measurements were subsequently made after the animals were killed and also after the bones were dissected free

4O

5O

i0

_2o Io

Ę0 O0
Ę 0 oo

Ę0

HEN A

"jl{_" HEN B Ę 0 HEN C

I0

LR 5 Cm DISTANCE

LR 4 Cm.

LS 3 Cm.

LR 2 Crn.

PROXIMAL

TO TIBIOTARSAL

JOINT

I
JOINT

FIGURE 1.--Bone

nmss measurements

along tibiar sites of three hens,

between left and right legs.

at various sites with comparisons

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

EFFECT OF RE_POSITIONING

ON

IN VlVO BONE MASS MEASUREMENT

t t

5ó

+ + Jr

+}+ ++

+

i"

:....... .:.:.y-:+
'":""

B

uJ

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

REMOVE AND REPLACE

+ ,i;i* S.o. _N-3)

VII Viii

IX

X

= 25.5
S.D.=0.99 Coef. Vor.=42 %

(N=I(_

FIGURE 2.--Error

of repositioning: of same hen.

ten measurements

from flesh. Segments of bone were cu% using

a sl)ecial holder with paralleled edges. The seg-

ments were accurately measured with a microm-

eter, dired at 100░C to constant weight,

weighed, defatted with ethanol-ether

extrac-

tion in the Soxhlet apparatus, weighed, ashed for 94 hours at 600░C, and weighed. Figure 3

gives the relation between weight of 1-cm ashed

segInents and bone mass measured in vivo. The

correlation coefficient was 0.957 and the regres-

sion equation, as determined by the least squares

method, indicates that the operational

bone

mass unit used in this laboratory is equivalent

to 11.5 mg of bone ash per linear centimeter of

bone. Comparison

of bone mass measured in

bones dissected free of flesh with weight of seg-

ments gave a correlation

coefficient of 0.995.

Correlation

coefficients between measurements

made on dead animals with flesh intact were of

the same order, as were comparisons with the

fat-free weight of bone segments.

COMPONENTS MEASUREMENT

OF THE

Measurements

of bone nmss on segments of

human cadaver bone after defatting and ashing

indicate 89% of the bone mass measurement

represents bone ash, 3% of the measurement

represents fat, and 8% of the measurement, rep-

resents protein and water.

QUANTITATION

OF BONE MINERAL

MEASUREMENT

IN DOMESTIC

ttEN

97

./

BOk_ MASS UNITS MEASURED tN VIVO _HED BONE SEGMENTS AND t$ Vakd_

i

RELATION BETWEEN WEIGHT OF LO CM.

' eS ░ĘĘ

" Q J*

=_o=_-__-

_-o,_

J

.2

.3

.4

WEtGH'I _N GRAMS

Fmum_ made ments.

3.---Comparison _n vivo with

of bone mass measurements weight of ashed 1-em bone seg-

QUESTION SENSITIVITY

OF /IRTIF.4CT

AND

The possibility that this measurement represents an artifact, or at least a parameter that does not vary in a biologic setting, seems unlikely but was evaluated by making sequential measurements in a group of eight pullets. Five

pullets were placed on a low calcium (0.1%

calcium but otherwise nutritionally

a_lequate)

diet, and the other three hens which served as

controls were permitted oyster shell ad libitum.

As shown in figure 4, the bone mass, shown as

means for each group, declined in the group de-

ficient in dietary calcium until the 15th day

when the curve "leveled off." This "leveling

off" was accompanied

by cessation of egg

production.

The control group did not change

in bone mass. This change in bone mass is in

agreement with measured changes in total car-

cass calcium by other workers and lends support to the conviction that the measurement of

bone mass is a reflection of total body calcium.

By plotting the number of eggs laid against

bone mass (as shown in fig. 5), a number of

regression curves can be obtained.

Inspection

of these curves indicates that, in the main, this

technique is capable of measuring the bone

mineral loss following laying a single egg. In

this study the average decline in bone mass with

each egg laid was 0.76 bone mass unit or equiv-

alent t_ 8.7 mg bone ash per linear centimeter

of the bone measured.

If the total body cal-

22 2O _18

EFFECT OF LOW DIETARY CALCIUM ON BONE MASS LN

MEAN VALUES Ę THREE PULLETS
OYSTER _I#EL /

AO. LIB.

,,{
:E
hi
z 14 o
m
12
IO

I_N OFIVIE
0.11ó

VALUES PULLETS
DIETARY

G&LCIUlll

0

,

I

0

I

1

,

I

I

I

I

[

I

I0

I

I

I

I

I

I

1

DAYS OF DET

I

I

I

20

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

{

J

30

FZGURE 4.--Bone

mass changes

in pullets

with severely

restricted

dietary

calcium.

98

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

OYSTER

RELATION

BETWEEN

NUMBER OF

AND BONE MASS IN VIVO

SHELL

AD. LIB.

INDIVIDUAL

VALUES

EGGS LAID
O.l% DIETARY

CALCIUM

24

22

22

2O

.-

o_ 18 _L

18

F-

16

14 o

12 I0

12
IO

\

O_
0 ' _,',;', _ '_ " ,b',_'_,_',_'

NUMBER

OF EGGS

/ / 0
LAID

' _,',;',_ ' & 'i_'i_,

FIGURE 5.--Change

in bone mass

in pullets calcium

with each diet.

egg laid, when

receiving

a low

cium is about 21 grams, each egg laid represents a loss of body calcium of about 10%.

CONCLUSION

AND SUMMARY

The measurement of bone mineral content by

tho Cameron-Sorenson

technique of attenuation

of a mono-energetic photon beam is an accurate measure of bone weight, or mass, that is repro-
ducible within at least 5% and capable of detecting a change in total body calcium of the order of 10% under the conditions of these studies.

REFERENCES

CAMERON, J. R.; and

Method.

Science,

SORENSON, J. : Measurement vol. 142. 1963, pp. 230-232.

of Bone Mineral in vivo: An Improved

MAZESS, R. B. ; CAMERON, J. R. ; O'CoNNoR, R. ; and KNUTZEN,

Mineral

Measurement.

Science. vol. 145, 1964, Pl). 388--389.

D. : Accuracy

of Bone

CAMERON, J. R. : Bone Mass

tion Detector.

Presented

Determination at current

Using symposium.

M(mochromatic

X-rays and a Scintilla-

*

QUANTITATION

OF BONE MLNERAL MEASUREMENT

IN DOMESTIC HEN

99

Part H

ACUTE

CHANGE

IN ACTIVITY

The relation between stress and strain acting on bones and its importance to calcium balance

has been recognized.

Hens raised in layer

cages tend to develop thin, frail bones which decrease the market value of the hen when

slaughtered.

It has been suggested that the

hen raised in layer cages develops demineralized

bones as a consequence of the limited activity as-

sociated with relatively restricted quarters.

In

an attempt to demonstrate

an effect of the

change in activity on bone mass, ten mature

hens, all of which had been raised in layer

cages, were divided into two groups. The first group remained in the cages and served as controls. The second group was transferred to a large (10 x 12 feet) pen which had been fitted with a wire floor to prevent access to litter. All hens received the same diet (a normal layer diet with oyster shell) and lighting conditions throughout the experiment; and these were un-

changed from prior to study. Both groups were weighed, and bone mineral measurements,

according to the method previously described, were made at the start and after 14 days. The results are shown in figure 1. Individual changes are shown with group averages repre-

sented by dotted lines. Average bone mass for

the caged group was 24.8 units at the start of

KEPT IN CAGES

PLACED ON FLOOR

__ 30 25 2o

the study and 25.0 at the end; it was 23.5 for the group placed on the floor at the start and the exact same value at the end of 14 days of increased activity. While average body weight of the caged group showed a slight increase, it decreased for the group on the floor. Therefore, no change in bone mineral content was n ..... *,"_*,_ with an increase in activity of 14 days' duration.

BONE MINERAL MATURATION

CHANGE

WITH

k positive calcium balance has been demon-

strated in the 2- or 3-week period which pre-

cedes laying the first egg. In an attempt to

demonstrate this calcium storage, bone mineral

measurements

were made in three 109-day-old

pullets at various intervals during their matura-

tion. Initially, they were reared in a floor pen

with a standard growth diet; after 35 days they

were transferred

to layer cages with a laying

ration consisting of 1.5% calcium plus oyster shell. This transfer was made well before the

first egg was laid. The growth curves, ex-

pressed as a percent of the first measured value,

are shown is figures 2, 3, and 4. The average

increase in bone mass for the three pullets was

63% and the average increase in weight was

43%. Daily egg production

was 76% for

pullets _46 and @47, and 90% for pullet

#48 following the first egg laid. These measurements indicate that the positive calcium bal-

ance which precedes egg laying is reflected in a greater increase in bone mass than can be accounted for by the increase in body weight. It also appears that there are abrupt fluctuations in the bone mineral content which precede by

several days the first egg laid.

IS

0
AY. BODY WT.

2.57 START

2.59 END 14 DAYS

1.86

1.79 KG

START

14 DAYS

END

Fiouas 1.-- Bone mass measurement

before and after

acute change in activity.

Group means

with dotted lines and did not change.

are shown

NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENT

CALCIUM

The optimum calcium supplement for laying hens has been estimated at 2.75% by the National Research Council (1962). This requirement has been based principally upon parameters of egg production and shell thickness. The prob-

100

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

lem of thin, frail bones which fracture during processing raises the possibility that the rec-

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
__
2O

4.0% Co

zoo

2.8%C0

óo 15 _o hd

15%C0

_

5o /_

o

dr ......

_

l_ld

--*- Bod7 _el_ot 46 _ la_u_

_

_ ............

D41_ or O_ATIO_

FIGURE 2.--Changes

in bone mass and body weight (ex-

pressed as a percent of the initial measurement)

with sexual maturation.

IO0 I

-- Bone _ss 50 % increase

.... Body _elght 32 $ Increase

. f.-"_

l_rst Egg Laid

o

1

f

o

30

6o

9o

DAYS OF 3BSE_VATION

Fzov_ 3.--Changes

in bone mass and body weight (ex-

pressed as a percent

of the initial measurement)

with sexual maturation.

-- Bo_ Mesa 68 $ _ncreaae

FIOUaE 4.--Changes

in bone mass and body weight (ex-

pressed

as a percent

with sexual maturation.

of the initial

measurement)

Io

O

50

I00

150

DAYS OF DIET

FIGURE 5.--Bone

mass changes in three group_ of ten

hens each with different levels of dietary calcium.

ommended supplement of calcium may not be adequate to maintain bone strength. To in,_es-
tigate this possibility, 40 adult hens were selected and divided into four groups according to body weight and egg production records. Each group received diets containing different amounts of calcium. Bone mineral measure-
ments, body weight, and egg production were recorded at various intervals. Except for cal-
cium, the diets were nutritionally adequate; the phosphorous content was 0.74% for all groups. The change in bone mass with duration of the various diets is shown in figure 5. The data points represent averaged values for the ten hens in each group. The fourth group, which received a lower phosphorous ration, is not shown. The data show a decline in bone mass
for the group which received 2.8% calcium in contrast with the group receiving 4.0% calcium.
Egg production was comparable for these two groups, and was greatest just prior to the measurement at the 52nd day of diet. The regression curve "levels off" at this point as the egg production declines. Customarily, first-year laying hens are slaughtered shortly after this decline in egg production. Figure 6 shows the marked decline in bone mass for two individual
hens selected from the group receiving 2.8% calcium. It can be seen that although a 4.0% calcium level will adequately maintain bone mass, the 2.8% level does not. Thus, if this parameter is considered, optimal calcium supplemental for the laying hen may be higher than the currently recommended 2.75%.

CAGE LAYER FATIGUE SYNDROME
This disorder, sometimes called "cage layer osteoporosis," is characterized by leg weakness,

QUANTITATION

OF BONE MINERAL

MEASUREMENT

IN DOMESTIC

_ZEN

101

2.8%

CALCIUM

0

5o

_00

I50

DAYS OF DIET

FI6URE 6.--Bone

mass changes in two hens receiving 2.8% dietary calcium.

demineralized

bones, normal serum calcium,

phosphorous,

and magnesium levels, and the

absence of other recognized causes of leg weak-

ness; it occurs in hens raised in layer cages.

The etiology and pathologic physiology is controversial or obscure. Hens with this condition

were sent to the University of Wisconsin Poul-

try Science Laboratory raisers in the vicinity.

from interested poultry Figures 7 and 8 show

sequential bone mass measurements

in six of

these animals.

Those in figure 7 were placed

in a floor pen with wood shavings while those in

figure 8 were separated from the litter by being

placed in a large cage with a wire floor. All

the animals were in poor condition upon arriv-

al and were unable to walk. The hens 1, 3, and

2O
|_ _

o_*---o Hen I_ I

"_"

Hen No 2

......

Hen No 3

o

50

100

150

DAYS OF OBSERVATION

FzGcmc 7.--Bone mass changes in hens recovering cage fatigue syndrome.

from

6 were able to walk within 3 days and were lay-

ing by 12 days of observation.

Hens 2, 4, and

5 were able to walk after 17 days and were lay-

ing after 9_.3days. These birds received a stand-

ard laying diet with oyster shell supplementa-

tion, and food and water were placed in indi-

vidual containers

near the disabled animal.

The initial bone mass measurements

of these

hens were all lower than the normal range (17

*-_v_"_"bone mass -.'-;_o_..__,w_"_..._„░.t

ó,_ age or

body weight), and the general improvement

correlated with increase in bone mass values.

This general birds which drome while

correlation was also noted in two developed the cage fatigue synunder observation at the Poultry

Research Laboratory and while receiving diets

He , No 4

--.

Hen No 5

......

Hen No 6

Z O m

50

100

150

DAYS OF OBSERVATION

FIGVRE 8.--Bone mass changes in hens recovering cage fatigue syndrome.

from

containing "2% calcium. It appears that this

syndrome is related in some way to mineral metabolism and that .this is reflected in bone

mass measurements. These measurements

of bone mineral content

under various conditions should not be con-

strued as detailed studies of the topics under

consideration,

but rather as examples of the

application of bone mineral measurements

to

an animal system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors express their appreciation

to

Drs. John R. Cameron, Department of Radiol-

ogy and Physics, and M. L. Sunde, Department

of Poultry Science, for support and encourage-

ment, and for making equipment and facilities

102

Ę DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

available. The authors also thank David Knutzen and Richard O'Connor for performing measurements.

COMMENTS

Dr. URIST. This brings up a third application

of the

problem apparent

of bone problem

density measurements.

First

of NASA, second is the clinical

is the prob-

lem of osteoporosis,

and third is a domestic

economic

problem, the problem of the laying hen.

I think Dr. Babcock's

demonstration

is a more severe

test for bone mass measurement,

I should say bone

ash mineral measurement,

than any I can think of in

the human, because

when the hen develops

a loss of

bone ash or ash mineral on a low calcium

say, she does continue

to make bone.

diet as you

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

For the first 4 or 5 days, as a matter of fact, there

is a great deal of bone matrix and insufficiently

min-

eralized matrix.

To meet the exigency of the moment,

she actually makes more bone than there was before in

the marrow

cavity.

If this method

detects

the ash

within 4%, this testifies to the accuracy

of the method

because you could not possibly do it with film. You

could not get a mixture

ferences

to this extent.

of crystals in film and see difI have tried it with film and

with chemical the two.

measurements

for calcium and compared

I hope that it will not be out of order to ask how

much cage layer osteoporosis Dr. BABCOCK. Cage layer

there fatigue

is in Wisconsin. is an important

problem in all states.

It is more particularly

impor-

tant in the warmer

climates.

pally a problem of hens raised

It seems to be princi-

in layer cages.

In this

country

this is an increasingly

common problem.

Precision Methods Using Soft Penetrating Radiation
for Bone Densitometry

M_TrN l- COHEN, Franklin GNO Corporation, and ALSr_T J. GmsoN, Jackson Memorial
Hosl ital

The soft X-radiation

instrument possibilities

in bone densitometry will be highlighted in this

paper. This discussion is not intended to be

a comprehensive

review or a detailed forecast

of the instrument

possibilities

in this field.

We will review only those features of prior

work which are significant to this discussion.

Some tentative suggestions concerning instru-

mentation

and the way these possible ap-

proaches

may affect the overall research

objectives are included.

Following some introductory

speculations to

promote informal discussion outside the scope

of this paper, we will specifically discuss two

related instrument

approaches.

One instru-

ment uses a two-gamma radioisotope source for both ground and flying clinical studies. The other instrument uses an X-ray tube to explore the ultimate limits of laboratory precision and to evaluate the accuracy of the simpler ap-

proach. The and accuracy sign problems proaches will time allows.

factors relating to the precision

of measurement

and related de-

of these two instrument

ap-

be analyzed in as much detail as

Our discussion considers only the uses of soft

radiation in a narrow beam geometry which un-

dergoes nearly exponential

attenuation.

The

attenuation factor is sensitive to both the atomic

number of the absorbing material and the en-

ergy of the radiation in a characteristic

way.

These properties permit the quantitative

analy-

sis of materials.

Living materials introduce the

necessity for the use of lower energies for

analysis.

The utilization of soft X-rays for the com-

positional analysis of complex materials has

been proposed and carried forth by many inves-

tigators for many years (Jacobsen,

1964;

Jackson and Lindberg, 1964; Sorenson and

Cameron, 1964). This approach and analysis

has been generally characterized by the consid-

eration of bne or more monochromatic

radiation

beams in a well-collimated,

narrow-beam

etry (Jackson
19 ).

and Lindberg,

1964;

geomLefker,

The virtue of monochromaticity

and collima-

tion is the resulting simplicity in the mathemat-

ical analysis.

Instrumentation

at the '2% precision level has

already been used in the laboratory environment (Cameron and Sorenson, 1963). Errors arising from problems of sample motion, characterization of the model, and others may limit

the accuracy to the 3% or 5% level. There is naturally a desire to improve the

precision and accuracy of measurement in bone

deasitometry to better than 1% and then on to

the 0.1% level. Further, there is a need for

reliable flying equipment outside of the ground

laboratory environment.

Such instrument im-

provement can be used to measure small rates

of change of the bone densitometry

status.

In the unexplored

instrument

design terri-

tory, a view of the over-all situation is given in

table I. There are elements of pure specula-

tion, considerable

obscured vision, and not a

little courage involved in offering this brief

summary for your consideration.

Shown are

promising areas of further study to quantify

103

104

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

TABLE I. SO _t Radiation Counting--The

Overall Abbreviated

View

░Ę
i

Radiation

source

and detector

Energy spectral properties

Source properties

Applicable

theo-

retical

an'alysis

Instrument

Percent

Project

sensor properties accuracy range time frame

Current status

Radioisotope
and NaI(T1)
detector.
Tube-target
and NaI(T1)
detector. Ion chamber
detector.

Narrow band.*
Many narrow bands.**
Broad band.#
Narrow band.*
Many narrow bands.**
Broad band.##

Thin sources.
Low activity

Elementary.

▒5to 10

.................

.........................

Thin sources.
Low activity

Simple ....

Portable___ Flyable _ _ _

=t=0.5 to 1.
........................

1 yr__

Understood.

Thick sources.
Higher activity.

Complex _ _ Portable___ Flyable ....

▒ 0.2 to 4- 0.5.
..........................

1-2 yr_

Unexplored.

Poor quantum efficiency.

Elementary.

Large machines.

Simple ....

Inefficient_

__

Heavy ....

▒0.05 to 0.1.
........................

1 yr___

Understood.

Efficient .....

Complex

_ _ Transportable.
Portable.

0.1 .....

2-3 yr_

Unexplored.

Broad band.###

Programmed volt.

Efficient

....

Complex _ _

0.5 to 1__ 2-3 yr_
........................

Unexplored.

*Narrow band is a monochromatic energy band. **Many narrow bands are polychromatie, i.e., several narrow bands used sequentially. #Broad band ismany narrow contiguousbauds used simultaneously. ##Broad band ismany narrow bands used sequentially. ###Broadband issequentiaulse ofdifferen#t4 broad bands obtainedby programmed voltageapplicatioonfthe tube source.

some very rough estimates set forth for both the

ground and flying equipment capability.

In the actual world of soft radiation sources,

especially where strong, small sources are re-

quired, these sources chromatic.

are not truly

mono-

The strong radioisotope

source is a thick

source with degraded radiation due to self-

absorption.

Other energies may also be present.

X-ray sources are also naturally broad band.

An effort to make the radiation monochromatic

with filters requires that considerable amounts

of radiation be thrown away. Although preci-

sion measurements

can be made in the 0.1%

range by starting with a higher power machine,

one naturally asks the question, "Why fight it?"

Instrumentation

planning

must consider

methods of using existing broad band sources

to achieve efficient use of the generated radia-

tion quanta. In the analysis of data from broad

band sources, computers will be necessary to ob-

tain the answers because the analysis is neces-

sarily more complex.

In reality, the current

approach to measurement is a simplification of

the actual problem to the point where the ele-

mentary analysis can be handled by a slide rule.

This simplification

is a significant source of

loss of accuracy and inefficiency.

In practical instrument

design, the factors

of reliability, size, and weight become as impor-

tant as accuracy from the viewpoint of practical

utilization.

This is particularly

true where

░.

PRECISIOlVNIETHODS USL_G SOFT PENETRATING RADIATION

105

flying equipment is concerned. Maximum bone

densitometry information

from each pound of

equipment and from each watt of power is

needed. Both minimum and safe radiation

exposure is another ingredient of design. A practical objecti_e from this efficiency
viewpoint is to use each quantum originating from either the radioisotope or tube source.

The longer term instrument design direction

u_Jliz_
not worked

colupu_auonal
out. These

te_xm_ques as yeL future techniques will

use the quanta presently filtered out to permit

the use of the simpler, slide rule mathematical

analysis.

For this reason broad band radia-

tions are included for its future potential in

table I. From a mathematical

viewpoint, the

broad band radiation beam may be considered

as the simultaneous

presentation

to the sample

of collimated radiation of adjacent monochro-

matic energy bands. This is termed simultane-

ous polychromatic

radiation.

This is in contrast

to the method of sequential use of different

monochromatic

radiations,

the analysis of

which leads to the n simultaneous

equations

which can be solved explicitly for n elements

(Jackson and Cameron, 1964; LeCker, 1964).

In the special case of a tube X-ray source, there is the capability of varying the electron

accelerating potential. a method of obtaining polychromatic radiation

This capability permits a variety of sequential sources. In this meth-

od the differences between successively emitted broad band spectra, as the voltage on the tube is decreased in increments, can be utilized for an

analysis procedure.

The capability

of this

method is certainly worth further study.

As we return to more trodden paths, the se-

quential polychromatic

tube X-ray source is a

proper point of immediate of several monochromatic

departure. radiation

The use sources

in sequence generated by heavy filtration of an

X-ray tube offers the practical opportunity

to

explore and determine in bone densitometry.

the accuracy

limitations

Aside from its clinical virtues, a tube X-ray source of this type evaluates the residual aceu-

racy assumptions of simpler instruments.

Such

a simpler portable and flyable instrument may

be built using an alternating

dual chromatic

radioisotope instrument such as using I m and Am .41. We consider both of these specific instrument approaches and their interrelationship to improve the accuracy of measurement.

PRECISION

AND ACCURACY

k digression is appropriate

to discuss preci-

sion and accuracy. For our purposes here,

precision is a measure of the repeatability of the

instrument on a given sample which apparently doesn't change, such as a phantom.

Instrumental

accuracy, on the other hand, is

a measure of the truth. How closely does the

precision measure correspond to the actual state

of affairs ? In a living sample the accuracy of

even a precise instrument is limited by its de-

sign characteristics.

It can only measure ac-

cording to the instructions

it receives.

It

interprets the sample according to a model of

the living sample and its inert interpretation,

the phantom.

MODELS AND PHANTOMS

The accuracy of the instrument is meaning-

ful for a quantitative

understanding

of the

living sample. The living sample is replaced

in the mind of the instrument designer and the instrument user with a model. In the calibra-

tion and test of the instrument, he uses a phantom design based on these models. Typically,

the models are here classed as either a physical element model or as a biological material model

(table II). The physical element model treats

the elements as independent

variables.

The

biological model treats the biological and meta-

bolic materials as independent

variables from

a functional point of view.

THE DUAL MONOCHROMATIC

N-MONOCHROMATIC

DESIGN

AND

The tube X-ray method utilizes the physical

model of the sample, for example, the heel bone

(os calcis). The physical model treats the ele-

ments as seven independent variables.

In the simpler dual gamma instrument, the

assumptions

are made about the relationship

between the two models of the structure.

These

106

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

TABLE II.--The
Model

Sample Under Measurement, Its Equivalent

Characteristics

Examples

Model
Application area

The measured in vivo sample.

Physical ....

Elements .............

Biological__

i

Metabolic

and biologi-

cal materials.

H, C, N, 0, Ca, P, others.
Hydroxyapatite, water, fat, muscle, protein, others.

Preferred

for mathe-

matic and analytic treatment.

Preferred

for clinical

understanding.

Physical--The Biological--The

2-_ analysis

requires

assumptions

n-_ sequential

polychromatic

to correlate

dynamics

of physical

and biological

models.

method

requires

no assumptions

concerning

the model

dynamics.

assumptions quantitative

introduce errors which still require evaluation.

Herein lies tile significant virtue of the larger

tube machine. This machine Call be operated

in many instrument modes from dual to n-poly-

chromatic to experimentally

valuate the effects

of model assmnptions situation.

ill the actual clinical

QUANTITATIVE

PRECISION

ACCURACY

ANALYSIS

AND

The use of a precision laboratory X-radia-

tion source of n sequential monochromatic

radia-

tions will permit the analysis of living bone

luaterial under conditions which permit the application of the simplest theory of the bone densitometry analysis. This theory utilizes the physical model of n elements. With adequate

radiation and the precision features of geometrical stability and radiation stability, the opportunity exists for substantial clarification

of mineral and nonmineral metabolic activity.

This knowledge can, in turn, be used to clarify

the type of correction needed to improve the

accuracy of a simpler dual galmna instrument

approach.

Knowing the magnitude of the er-

rors introduced in the simpler equipment will

naturally eliminate uncertainty

and improve

confidence in its accuracy ]eve].

The main sources of errors are listed here.

The discttssion below treats them to a greater

or lesser extent in conjunction with an example

of the os calcis measurement

and the comple-

mentary

two-instrulnent

approach.

Errors

that are principally those of precision are sta-

tistical fluctuations, monocllromaticity

assump-

tions, and collimation and scattering.

Errors

that are either systematic or instrumental

and

affect accuracy relate to the validity of model,

including physical elements, biological mate-

rials, and the motion of sample.

THE SEVEN-ELEMENT METHOD

X-RAY TUBE

The mathematical

treatment of the sequential

polychromatic

approach consists of considering

that the model of an in rico bone consists of n

elements, typically other trace units.

H, C. N, O, Ca, P, S, and With seven monochromatic

energies sequentially irradiating the sample, the amount of each element can be determined.

The typical family of equations consists of

_I=_Io exp- (_tL_X_+_t_2X2+ .-- +_mX_) (1)

_I=_Io exp- (_t,_X_ +_t_X_+ "" +,t,,X,) (2)

Here the right subscript refers to the element

in the sample. The left subscript refers to the

energy. Thus, _Io is the unabsorbed intensity

of energy 1. X refers to the thickness of the

element of the right subscript in grams per

square centimeter.

The mass absorption coeffi-

cient t_ in square eentimenters per gram applies

to the energy of the left subscript and the mate-

rial of the right subscript.

The measured attenuation

factors 1I/1Io of

the seven energies is related to seven elements

and seven known mass absorption coefficients

for these elements. Typically, this 7ū7 equa-

tion matrix can be solved using a computer for

each element. The precision of measurement

PRECISION

_ETI:IODS

USING SOFT PE:NETRATI:NG

R._DIATION

107

can be worked out as a function of source

strength, mass absorption coefficient values and their differences, and the other purely mathematical and radiation statistical fluctuations.

The mathematics

is simple to a programmed

computer. The advantage of this approach is that,
a clinical point of view, no assumptions made beyond the fact that each element

from are
may

experieiioe ._.ra.u._.po.r._......m-."u.r.....uu%_ :m_ua_p_enu_enu.av. _I_

A metabolic change in the status of the

sample is independently

evaluated of the actual

biological chemicals which may undergo trans-

port. Certainly the over-all changes in the

element ratios may be explained by certain

amounts of bone mineral, water, fat, muscle, or

other substances.

The many possibilities are

not part of the instrument

measurement

or

model assumptions.

For these reasons the seven-gamma method

presents the opportunity for measurement with

the greatest accuracy. We now reduce the num-

ber of independent variables by grouping them

into two natural groups and use two radiations

for measurement.

The rationale of this proce-

dure is that there is naturally a hea_?ó element

group 1--bone minerals (Ca and P)--and

a

light element group 2--flesh material

(H,

CNO). The question arises that perhaps three

groups are better, i.e., to separate H and

C, N, O. This is not answered as yet. This

question is resolved from an experimental point

of view by the fact that two radiations are read-

ily available from radioisotopes,

namely, 1125

and Am 241. Further, the X-ray instrument can

be operated in a "2-or 3-radiation mode to exper-

imentally establish the accuracy of the simpler

approach by comparing it with the 7-radiation

answer on the same sample. Still using the

physical model, we now reduce the number of

monochromatic

radiations to two arising either

from the X-ray tube or from 1125 and Am _1.

Here now we can compare two instruments.

THE TWO-ELEMENT

RADIATION

METHOD

GROUP-DUAL

In the composite sample, such as the os calcis, a model consisting of two distinct groups of ele-

ments is considered to comprise the total sample

thickness.

The thickness is expressed in mass

absorption units of grams per square centimeter

at the measurement

location (Cameron and

Sorenson, 1963; Grodstein, 1957). At this loca-

tion two monochromatic

radiation beams in a

well-collinmted

beam undergo exponential

at-

tenuation described by

_i = Jo exp ( -- ._X1 + _mX2)

(3)

_I=jo exp (-_,_X_+_,_X_)

(4)

The subscripts a and b refer to the energy,

and the subscripts 1 and "2 refer to the element

groupings.

Typically, material 1 is calcium

and phosphorus content, and material 2 is the

hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen con-

tent of the sample.

In a typical bone demineralization

situation,

where the sensitivity of the method is consid-

ered, the bone elements depleted are relatively small. The amount of bone elements removed

is AXe. Associated with this loss is a corre-

sponding loss of the other elements H, C, N, O

associated chemically with Ca and P. Addi-

tionally, other metabolic changes may inde-

pendently idd or subtract to the H, C, N, O con-

tent. Thus, the value of AX.. is not necessarily

functionally related to AX.

Precision and Accuracy of Measurement

The basic, two-equation

approximation

to the

bone model is now explicitly solved for the

thickness and precision relationships.

The

function R,, Rb is defined as the logarithmic

ratio of the linear attenuation factor given as

follows:

a%

"_--

X

R,,=In V=aIX1A1

-]-a_t2 2

(5)

b'o

X'

Rb=ln -_=b_1 1+b.212

(6)

From this pair of simultaneous linear equations, the value of X_, the thickness of the mineral elements, can be explicitly expressed as

X1 .-_Rab_2- Rbal_2

(7)

a_l b_Ż2-- aJ22b_l

792.--955

108

DEVELOPMENT

OF METItODS

A similar expression for the thickness non-mineral elements is given by

of the

x2 Rabul--R_ul

(8)

aUIb_2--a_2b#l

From these expressions, the effect on precision

of measurement

arising from the statistic

fluctuations of counting can be derived. The

statistical uncertainty arising from the two in-

dependent counting fluctuation errors is given

by the standard general expression.

This ex-

pression, using the nomenclature of this discus-

sion, may be used to calculate the fractional

deviation to be expected in X1, the standard deviation measure of the fluctuation of the total

count used in the measurement.

xl ] \x,/

"_( _xl_2(_bi]

(43)

2}

(9)

_XI is the fractional Here,

deviation

in X1

expected to arise from the standard deviation

fluctuation, _/ and _b/, expected in the meas-

ured count _I and hi.

Utilizing equation (7), the partial differen-

tiations are performed and followed by the alge-

braic manipulations

indicated.

The following

result for the fractional error is obtained

AXI {

1

=\R_b_2--Rbom]

_/._\/b_.I2-1---_'b2.,I1\1]/2

(10)

This expression can be rewritten the unabsorbed source count

in terms of

1

b#_eRa _eRb 1/2

AX_ (Rabt_2--R_tL2)(--_o

-t--_o )21 (11)

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

J

Thus, for the precision of measurement

rela-

tionship, equation (11) can be expressed in

terms of the lower energy a on the basis of

equal contribution

to the error using equation

(13) as follows:

AX1

b_2 R./2

/2

X_-_ --R_b_2--R_u2_/ _

(14)

We can now illustrate the use and limitations
of the equation with the example of the os ealeis measurement.

Os Calcis Physical Element Model

For the purpose of numerical evaluation of

the two-gamma

method, a model of the os

calcis is set up. This model consists of 2 cm

of tissue, 2 cm of tissne matrix within the bone,

and 2 cm of dense bone of 1.85 g/cm 3 (fig. 1).

The dense bone portion is considered, in turn,

to be composed of approximately

30% weight

of the calcium and phosphorus elements. Thus,

the total sample is composed of two fractions

according to the physical element model. The

Ca, P (fraction 1) is (2 cmX 1.85 g/em S) ū30%,

which is 1.1 g/em 2. This is a typical value for

X_. The H, C, O, N (fraction 2) is 4 emūl.0

g/cm a and (2ū 1.85 g/cm _) ū70%, which is 6.6

g/em 2. This is a typical value for X2.

k'x.',_
L _j_
I

DETECTOR CO LLIMATOR

For equal contributions

from

source b to the error, the equality

ing terms holds

source a and of the follow-

_/o

_/0

(12)

Rearranged,
equal time ratio

then, the source strengths

for

of measurements

bear the following

Jo b#ge(R_-Rb)

J0

_

(13)

F _

OS CALCIS (HEEL BONE) TISSUE
COLLIMATOR

SOURCE HOtDER

FIGURZ 1.--Source

and beam geometry caleis management.

duaI gamma os

PRECISION

METHODS

USING SOFT PENETRATING

RADIATION

109

Experimental

Arrangement

The radioisotope sources are 100 mCi of I m

and 1 mCi of Am 241, alternately placed in front

of the aperture.

The source geometry consists

of a source diameter of 2 mCi. The beam is de-

fined by collimation to produce a beam of 2 mm diameter at 10 cm from the source. The

exit collimator of the source is a dual aperture

to avoid unn_ry

ex_s_re and production

of scattered radiation.

The entrance collimator

of the NaI (T1) detector preserves
with a dual aperture arrangement detection of scattered radiation.

this aperture to avoid the

Radiation Sources and Monochromaticity

The radiation from 1125is reported to be principally 27.5 keV, with the remainder 31 keV (15%), 35 keV (5% to 7%) (Sorenson and Cameron, 1964). This mixed radiation can be

filtered to increase the relative proportion of

the 27.5 keV radiation or used unfiltered.

In

either case, a correction can be applied to the

measurement based either on a calibration pro-

cedure or a mathematical

treatment.

Such a

correction is not considered here but is neces-

sary in thick samples, where the absorption effects of the 27.5 and 35 keV radiation become

appreciable.

Absorption Coefficients

Typically, for the purposes of the present

example, the representative

values of the mass

TABLE III.--Representative

Absorption

Coeffleient

elements model)

Values of Mass Os Calcis (physical

Physical elements model

Im energy a, cm_/g

Am 241energy b, cm2/g

(1) Ca, P ....... (2) H, C, N, O__

4.8=./_1 0.3=_u2

0.19= t,#l 0.54= _2

absorption coefficients have been estimated and

listed in table III. The mass absorption eo-

efficient for the calcium-phosphorus

component

is based on an equal weight ratio of calcium

to phosphorus bone.

in the material lost from the

Statistical

Fluctuation

Error-Numerical

Calculation

The estimate

of the contribution

of the

error from statistical fluctuations is made from

the analysis above. First, fine value of the R is calculated.

From

equation (5)

/?,=4.8 Cm2xl.1 _+.30 g
From equation (6)

Cm'X6.6 g

_m2----7.3 (15)

Rb=.19 cm12.1xg

cmg_ + .54 cm62.6xg

_mm2----3.8 (16)

Using these numerical values and the mass

absorption coefficient values of Table III, the

following fractional

relationship,

equation (17), for the

error in mineral elements as a

function of the unabsorbed count measured at

the detector is found from equation (14). The

contribution

to the error from each source is

considered equal.

AX,__ 10.6

(17)

Thus, for an error of 4- 1% under the conditions of this problem, the 27.5 keV source a, produces

j0_( X, _* (10.6)2=104X (10.6)2

----1-.2X 106 counts without the sample present.

An equal part 59.6 keV, source tion (13) is

of this error arises from the b, whose strength from equa-

,Zo hie=_ e(_'-'")

( 0.3 _2 ,Io =9.3 X 10-3,Io_ 1.2X 104 counts

Thus, the count in the detector from the higher energy source b need only be about 1/100 the

110

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

count from the lower energy source a for equal contribution to the total error.

Error With 100 Millicuries 1125 and 1 Millicurie Am 241

On the basis of the experimental

geometry,

the os ealcis model and source strengths of 100

mci 11_5 and 1 mci Am 241, the error in bone min-

eral element depletion can be estimated from

the analysis. Using equation (15), the standard

deviation arising from fluctuation in measured count can be evaluated from the unabsorbed

count rate expected.

The unabsorbed count from 1 125 is given by

_/o=3.7>(107 mc dx100
sec

mcX1.4
d

X'r(0"l)_ cm2 __=1.3X10

5 s_et (181

Thus_ using equation (15)

AX,

10.6

....

0.03 per second count

(19)

For a 9-second count each from both sources, the error is -1%. If a 10-mci Am 241source is used, the fluctuation error is reduced to -+-0.8%. In table IV a summary of the fluctuation error as a function of source strength is

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
Q
given. For a 400-mci 1125 source and 40-mci Am 241 source, the fluctuation error may be expected to be less than __+0.5%.

OS C.4LCIS--DOSE

ESTIMATE

Considerations

of the radiation dose are im-

portant. lated to conditions

The maximum the measurment
of measurement.

skin dose may be reaccuracy under the The basis of skin

dose is 9x 109],/cm 2 per rad at 27.5 keV and

1.1x 1010],/cm2 per rad at 60 keV (5). For a

-+ 1% experiment, the total count is 1.3 x 105],/

Sec ū 10 sec over an area of _r (0.1) 2 cm 2. This is

equivalent to 4.1 ū 10' ],/cm 2 from 112░ which

is approximately

0.05 rad per measurement.

The dose contribution

from the Am 24' exposure

is less, since only 1.2 ū 10 4 unabsorbed gammas

are incident per measurement.

The Am 2,1 dose

contribution is about 3.5 ū 10 -5 rad, which is neg-

lible. Thus, the tissue dose is due almost entirely to the 1 1_5. As the error decreases and as the

square root of the count and the dose increases

linearly with the count, a measurement

of

-+-0.4% accuracy produces an 1 125 exposure of

approximately

0.27 rads to the skin in the

proposed experimental configuration.

The tube

source of X-ray will be able to supply radiation at an equivalent of 10s], and produces an exposure of 5 rad at 27.5 keV.

TABLE IV.--Source

Emission, Precision, and Exposure

(sample spot diameter 02)

Source

radioisotope

Iodine

125

Americium

mC

counts

me

241 counts

Fluctuation

pro*

cision level

(percent)

Radiation

expo-

sure (rad)

100

1.2X 10 _

1

400

4. 8ū106

4

100

1.2ū100

10

400

4 ū 106

40

10 '

▒1

4X 104

▒0.5

100

▒0.8

4 X 10 s

▒0.4

O. 05 Ę 051 Ę 24 Ę 27

Tube

lO s

106

▒0.1

5

lO s

108

▒0. 05

10

PRECISION

METIIODS

USING SOFT PENETRATING

RADIATION

111

FLESH MEASUREMENT

In the two-gamma

measurement,

tile oppor-

tunity exists to scan the heel. A measurement of the tissue area to the rear of the os calcis can

be made. The value of this measurement of the

tissue changes to bone densitometry remains to

be assayed. Such a measurement after correla-

tion with the more precise n gamma tube meas-

urement offers a possible opportunity to correct

for a possible large change of tissue

status in prolonged demineralization.

measurements

of bone

REDUCTION

OF ERRORS

MOTION

OF SAMPLE

DUE TO

A prominent source of inaccuracy in a live

sample is the serious problem of geometrical

stability.

This is especially true where a meas-

urement extends over an nppreciab]e period

of time. Not only must a measurement be made

at a specific spot, but also the spot. must be located at some future time for a new measurement.

To overcome the difficulty of landmark location,

an area-scan procedure can be used. For preci-

sion measurement,

motion during the scanning

period results in blurring of the internal refer-

ence marks. One solution is to use a region where a well-defined beam can be moved around

without changing the answer, that is, the bone

is reasonably uniform in thickness.

There are instrumentation

methods to cor-

rect for this motion error to any degree desired.

The basic approach is to use a geometry sensor

which measures the displacement

of the bone

densitometry sensor from its standard position.

This geometrical displacement

can be sensed

and used to reject the densitometry data. Thus_

the counting data is only registered for the time

the sample is in position, i.e., the measurement is made in live-time.

The elegant approach for a geometry sensor is to use another radiation sensor to relate the

measurement

to an internal position where a

steep gradient of density exists, such as the

edge of the bone. The difficulty with this type of internal landmark geometry sensor is that these radiation beams have the normal statistical

fl_wtuation problem. An alternate practical ap-

preach is the use of an external lanchnark sen-

sor. This sensor can detect the edge of the

sample by mechanical,

optical, or magnetic

means. Typically,

a magnetic ferric oxide

stripe can be painted on the skin of the heel and

detected by a magnetic sensing arrangement. Such _ device can detect motion of 0.01 cm in

less than 0.01 sec. In fact, it may be too sensi-

tive. The appropriate

method and sensitivity

desii_ed can be worked m,t for the level of ac-

curacy needed. The opportunity

to eliminate

motion as u major source of error does exist.

PHANTOMS

Some mention is necessary on the phantom

problem. The direction for the improvement

of phantoms is the use of actual elements since

precision and accuracy are influenced by small

differences in absorption coefficients. The ele-

me_lts are necessary- for calibration of the mass

absorption coefficients on the beam used. Com-

pounds of these elements are needed to simu-

late the biological model and its dynamics.

Measurement of c]mnge of status can be sim-

ulated in the phantom with the use of the same

elemental composition.

The effect of cross-in-

terference of the simultaneous transport of the

several real biological materials can be evaluat-

ed in the phantoms to evaluate both the mathe-

matical analysis and accuracy of the simpler in-

struments utilizing two or three radiation bands.

TUBE X-RAY SOURCE

The tube source of X-rays offers the capabil-

ity with filtered monochromatic

radiation to

_ach the -+-0.1% precision level. Typically, at

'27.5 keV, a count of l0 s reaches the ▒0.1% pre-

cision level at a skin exposure level of 5 rad.

For rapid measurement,

the integ-ral counting

is done with an ion chamber and electrometer

to avoid dead time problems.

(The NaI (T1)

counter is suitable for the radioisotope source at

the ▒ 1% level.)

The tube X-ray source can be operated in the

equivalent dual monochromatic

mode to com-

pare the performance

of the tube source instru-

ment and radioisotope

instrument.

Many

minor sources of accuracy uncertainties

relat-

112

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

ing to the phantom sample and metabolic dy-

namics can be evaluated.

The tube X-ray

instrumentation the instrumental

becomes, relatively speaking, standard of reference.

CAUBRATION

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Q

mit the quantitative

evaluation of the magni-

tude of residual assumptions

present in the

portable machine.

Indeed_ it may eliminate

certain features, which may be found to be

unnecessary,

to further simplify and improve

the usefulness of the portable machine.

Calibration procedures are obviously impor-

t.ant for the purpose of accurate measurement.

The accuracy of measurement can be made to

approach the precision with a different value

which relates to the accuracy of the phantom

and the understanding

of the biological dynam-

ics under measurement..

From a physicist's ments of appreciable

point of view, two instrudifference in precision level

can be used in an equivalent experimental

arrangement.

The more precise instrument

then contributes to the true evaluation of the

accuracy of the less precise unit.

Each instrument approach is complementary

to the other. In particular,

the attempt to

achieve a new level of accuracy plateau in a

measurement to the __+0.1% level by the large

tube machine will assure that the portable ma-

chine will achieve its accuracy objective levels of ▒1% or better. The large machine will per-

CONCLUSIONS

The capability exists to build precision in-

strumentation

for both the ground and flying

clinical use. There is a need for a multipat.h

program approach for instrumentation

which

ranges from the ultimate in precision instru-

mentation where weight and power is not considered a limitation to the reliable portable,

flyable, light-weight equipment.

The precision clinical equipment will contain

a minimum of physical and clinical assumptions

to permit evaluation of the approximations

in-

herent in the design of simpler equipment.

It. is not unreasonable to expect a project pro-

gram of instrumentation

encompassing the sev-

eral groups of active investigators

to achieve

the objectives of accuracy of ▒0.1% or better

in tube equipment and ---0.5% for portable and

flying equipment.

REFERENCES

CAMERON,

R.; and SORENSO_ó, JA_ES A. : Measurement

of Bone

Improved

Method.

Science, vol. 142, no. 3589, 1963, p. 230.

Mineral

In Vivo: An

GRODSTEIN, G. W. : X-Ray Absorption

and Scattering

Coefficients.

National

Bureau

of

Standards

583 Suppl., 1957.

JACOBSON, BERTIL: X-Ray Spectrophotometry

in vivo. Am. J. Roentgenol.,

voh 91, 1964,

p. 202.

JACOBSON, BERTIL; and LINDBERO, BJORN: X-Ray

Spectrophotometer

for Simultaneous

Analysis

of Several Elements.

Rev. Sci. Instr., vol. 35, 1964, p. 1316.

LEFKER, ROBERT: The Composition

Analysis

of N Component

Systems

by the X-Ray

Absorption

Method, Technical

Report No. 2457, U.S. Army Engineering

Research

and

Development

Laboratories,

April 1964.

SORENSON, JAMES A. ; and CA_EaON, J. R. : Body Composition

Determination

by Differen-

tial Absorption

of Monochromatic

X-Rays.

Symposium

of Low-Energy

X- and

Gamma Source, Chicago, Illinois, October 1964.

PRECISION

_d_ETHODS

USING

SOFT PEA_ETRATING

RADIATIG_

113

COMMENTS

Dr. RICH : These very high precisions with relatively

low counting rates are somewhat surprising, to me at

least, and lead me to wonder whether you are expect-

ing a very low background.

My question then is: Is

it practical with the sort of geometry you describe

and with the amount of shielding and so forth that

you are going to put into flight, to coun_ on low back-

ground rates with these high sources, a few cenU-

meters away, and even, indeed, low noise level, etc.?

T_ _.

_-_

if you have a high background, you

cannot get this precision with these low counts.

Dr. COHEN : YOU must consider that a measurement

is being made here with 50 millirad and here with 5 rad. The astronaut in the background is not going to have that large an exposure.

Dr. RICH : I was not thinking so much about him as

about the crystal;

the receiving

crystal

has to be

shielded very carefully here.

Dr. COHE_. It is soft radiation and you have an op-

portunity to use heavy Z, large Z to do it.

Dr. MALETSKOS. Radiation

coming in from back-

ground is a higher content.

It will produce a lot of

high counting

rates down in the very low regions in

which you are working.

Dr. COHEN. I think you will find Chat this is very

much higher than the expected

background

in terms

of the local doses.

Dr. MALETSKO8. Don't worry about the radiation

dose to the person.

We are talking

grounds for the detector.

Dr. COHE.W. The dose in the detector

about the backis the measure

of the Dr.
number

coun_ precision.

MALETSKOS. Fifty millirads

of individual

events.

represents

quite a

Dr. COHEN. That is right.

It is much larger than

actual backgrounds.

I think you will find that the

ratio of counts in the measurement

to backgrounds

will be 100:1 or greater.

Let me go back to one other point

You said the

total number

of counts here looks small.

The total

number of counts is relat_l

to the actual measure-

ment with the number

of mean free paths you have

through your sample.

If your sample is effectively

thicker, your accuracy

in measuremen_

of the sample

is better than the fluctuation

accuracy, in other words,

This is why this factor in count rate fuctuation

can be an apparent 1% error and yet come out with a better

measurement

in the precision of the thickness.

Dr. RICH. Could I ask a question about the ex-

posure?

In the slide, you

neighborhood ment ?

of 50 mlllirad.

indicated Were

exposures

in the

these per measure-

Dr. COHEN. Yes, they were per measurement,

just

localized at the spot.

Dr. CAMERON. It wasn't clear what experimental

measurements

have been made to date.

Have you

used a tube with monochromatic

X-rays?

The second

part of this question is: What is the degree of mono-

chromaticity of the output bea_?

The first question mental measurements

is: Experimentally, have been done?

what experi-

Dr. COHEN. Dr. Gilson has been

for several years.

I have some

today from Frank Day concerning

working curves
some

in _ area we received of the meas-

urements.

We actually

have not evaluated

a specific

phantom

with regard to the precision

levels here.

This is my version of what I think c_n be done. Mr.

Day working with Dr. Gilson has come up with curves

that are exponentials

from 60 to 20 keV just to show

the nearly exponential

attentuation

i_actors.

We have

not built anything

nor proved anything at this point.

Dr. CA_T_0N. I WOUld like to make a comment

in

regard through which slides

to the analysis

of errors.

We have gone

this, we have included

a few other things

are not included

in these relatively

complex

and they are confusing

to discuss

intelligibly

in a short period of time and with people who are not

mathematically

inclined.

The problem is that when

you go beyond a two or three co_nI_nent

system your

errors essentially

go up exponentially.

When you go

through the analysis

of these things, it is terrifically

impressive

how a 0.1% error in the absorption

coeffi-

cient changes your results in a three-monochromatic

gamma system.

Another commen_ I would like to make is that the

impression

was given

here _a_

photons to determine

the mineral

you needed

two

content of the ce

calsis.

If this is true, you do nut know the thickness

of your total bone plus tissue,

assuming

a two-

component

system with

a single monochromatic ment tells you the ratio

no absorption

coefficient,

then

radiation of mineral

absorption

experi-

to nonmineral.

Dr. COHEN. I am trying óo get another order of

magnitude

of precision.

I can't do it with a slide rule.

What you say is correct.

That is why I want to em-

phasize that we are going on now to the next two

significant

figures and this is a rough problem.

You

are purchasing

two orders of magnitude

of effort.

Dr. CAx, ERON. I think we are down very close to I%. The next order of magnitude down to 0.1% will

require an effort of about a hundred times.

Dr. MALETSKO8. Dr. Cohen has already indicated

that is so. He has a big computer to solve the equa-

tion_ This is the price you pay.

My reaction from actual experience, being partly a

physicist and a biologist, is that biology sometimes can

get so intractible that 1% may be just the finite limit

of a biological system no ma_ter whwt the physics

might say, and we have to keep this in mind.

114

Ę DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

Dr. MALETSKOS. In your analysis

you are controlled

by the absorption

coefficients

which you a_sign to what

you think is represented

correctly

in the system.

Do

you have any idea how close that is or will we tend

to end up with an elegant calculation

but one which

may be literally uninterpretable? Dr. COHEN. I think in the final analysis

we have to

get three or four significant

figures and possibly even

more. Tlle only way you can do this is to put the ele-

ment in your machine

and measure

it under the same

conditions

you are using to measure the sample.

You

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Ę

t

have to get a pure sample of the elemen,t and make

your own determination

of the absorption

coefficient.

Dr. CAMERO_'_. The National

Bureau

of Standards

which has specialized

in precision

measurements

has

done considerable

work in this, and their precision

is

about 1% on their absorption

coefficient.

Moving those

absorption

coefficien.ts,

making them more accurate

by

a factor of 10, is not a trivial job. You have scattering

problems,

geometry,

,and absolute

measurements.

This is a formidable

task.

Iodine-125 Bone Densitometry

NELS M. STV.A_COIOVO,Department

of

Radiology, The University of Chicago, and

LAW_NC_ H. LANZL, Department

of

Radiology, The University of Chicago, and

the Argonne Cancer Research Hospital

GENERAL

RADIOLOGIC

PROBLEM

From the radiologic viewpoint, severe degrees

of osteoporosis or osteomalacia are readily rec-

ognized. When collapse of the vertebrae with

ballooning

of the intervertebral

disks and

marked thinning of the cortex of the long bones

has occurred, with normal values of serum cal-

cium, phosphorus,

and alkaline phosphatase,

the diagnosis of osteoporosis is obvious. It is

sometimes very difficult to distinguish between

osteomalacia and osteoporosis.

In fact, many

radiologists call all demineralization

of bone

"osteoporosis"

and make no effort to differenti-

ate. It. is impossible

to determine

minor

changes in bone mineralization

either from

osteoporosis or osteomalacia by viewing radio-

graphs.

OSTEOMALACIA

Osteomalacia

(by definition, "soft bones")

is not as common as osteoporosis_

The radio-

logic appearance of osteomalacia in the infant and child prior to the closure of the epiphyseal

plates usually poses no problem, old seams the definitive finding.

with the osteIn the adult,

the appearance of osteomalacia is not as specific.

The appearance of the decalcification

is quite

uniform and the bones usually show a lack of

trabecular structure.

The cortex also becomes

thin. In osteomalacia,

noncalcified

matrix is

present, so that by chemical analysis one finds

a decrease in mineral content per unit volume.

One of the characteristic

findings in far ad-

vanced adult osteomalacia

is the presence of

pseudofractures.

Tlmse are ribbon-like zones

of decalcification

extending into the bone at

approximately

right angles to the margin.

They were first described by Looser and later

by Milkman and are called infractions of bone.

OSTEOPOROSI$

0steoporosis

by definition is an abnormal

porousness or rarefaction

of bone by enlarge-

ment of its canals or the formation of abnormal

spaces. It has generally been considered as a decrease of bony tissue in which the primary disturbance is a lack of bone matrix formation

with a corresponding

reduction in mineral con-

tent parallel with the loss of bone matrix. This

reduction in bone mass is without any proven

change in its chemical composition.

The values

of serum calcium, phosphorus,

and alkaline

phosphatase are normal or, as some investigators have found, a slightly elevated serum phos-

phatase level. The significance of this can be

argued. Bone is not static and resorption and

rebuilding occur at all times in the normal per-

son in response to stress. Whatever the cause

of osteoporosis, a decrease in matrix is the end result. The loss of bone mass in some patients

is accelerated over the gradual loss of bone mass

which occurs with normal aging. The radio-

logic appearance of the bones in osteoporosis is

not vet 3" distinctive.

As a rule, the trabecular

structure can be seen and the bones appear ab-

nornmlly radiolucent.

The most important

finding is the tkinning of the cortex. Sub-

115

116

DEVETA:_NIENT

OF MEt:HODS

periosteal re_;rFt)o_n does not occur. PseudofractureC_'r_ very uncommon (Pugh, 1954).

ETIOLOGY

The classic explanation is that osteoporosis is the result of a defect in the endocrine system_ resulting from any different causes and combinations of causes (Albright et al., 1941 ; Urist, 1958; Urist, 1959). The endocrine theory of osteoporosis received its greatest impetus in the metabolic balance studies of Albright and Reifenstein (1948).
Nordin (1961; 1962) recently suggested that

the primary cause of osteoporosis is a longstanding negative calcium balance. The loss of the bone mineral being followed by the removal of matrix thus produces a reduction of bone mass without reducing the mineral content of the residual bone. Other workers (Harrison et al., 1965), on the basis of calcium metabolism studies in patients with osteoporosis, have found an increase in calcium uptake on a high calcium diet and also noticed relief of symptoms.
For many years there has been a great need

for a method of assessing quantitatively

the

degree of mineralization

of the skeleton and

a means of comparing a given patient with

others and the patient with himself in the

fourth dimension, which is time. The method

used in everyday radiological practice is the

visual assessment of the mineralization

grade of

tile skeleton on conventional radiographs.

This

method is handicapped by considerable individ-

ual variations and the subjective bias of the

individual examiner. One cannot reproduce his

results on repeated examinations

of the same

material.

The thickness of the cortical layer

of the 10ng bones is relatively easy to measure

and it can be used as an estimate of the mineral-

ization stage in clinical radiology. It is perhaps much more accurate than the subjective estimation of osteoporosis on the basis of lumbar spine films. However, it is not a sensitive indicator

of demineralization,

as it is not apparent to

the eye until the loss of bone is more than 10

to 15%. The changes cannot usually be easily discerned until after a loss of 20%. The

method, however, has some clinical application.

Barnett and Nordin (1961) use the following

IN BONE

DEN_ITOMETRY

method.

The thickness

of the medial and

lateral cortices of the femoral shaft at the thick-

est part of the cortex is measured.
these two thicknesses is divided shaft diameter at the same level.

The sum of
by the total The fraction

multiplied by 100 gives a ratio which has been variously termed the femoral or humeral score, or the cortical index. The arithmetical mean of the cortical index is 0.55 for the humerus and 0.63 for the femur in normals. This index

gives an objective and easy means of investigat-

ing the grade of osteopc, rosis and would be use-

ful in large scale studies of osteoporosis.

If it

requires a change of 20% to be measured, it is obvious that the cortical index is not exact

enough to measure fine degrees of difference or for following a given patient in the fourth dimension of time.

METHODS

The method of using transmission

measure-

ments for anMyses of one sort or another has

been used very often in physics.

Omnell

(1952) presents a good summary of the work

done before 1957 on bone mineral changes in

_ivo, using a standard X-ray tube as the radia-

tion source and photographic detector.

film as the

,Subsequent examples of these techniques have

been the work of Nordin et al. (1962) who per-

formed desintometry

on body section radio-

graphs of the lumbar spine and compared the

density of the vertebrae to that of the inter-

vertebral disk. Mayo (1961) made quantitative

measurements

of bone mineral content of the

os calcis and the ulna, using a step wedge with

the parts emersed in water and using film to

record the changes in density.

Doyle (1961)

made similar measurement on the ulna, using a

step wedge axed a special automatic recording

densitometer.

To eliminate the use of film as

a detector, Mayer (1960) used a scintillation

counter for measuring transmission of X-rays.

Vose (1968) made measurements

of the trans-

mission of X-ruys through the femur, using a

direct counting system. Gershon-Cohen

(1958)

used a gamma source with direct counting of the transmitted beam by a scintillation counter.

IODINE- 12 5 BONE
g

An instrument (Lanzl and Strandjord, 1964)

using radioactive 112_ has been devised for non-

destructive testing to determine the condition of the bone mineral in the skeleton. This is

accomplished

by studying the transmission

through a single finger bone of the radiation emanating from I _5. For small animal work, a rear leg is used. The smaller the bone min-

eral content, the higher will be the transmis-

81011 DI tile rauiatlvll

u_lv u_xL t_Av _**_. A. lower

value of bone mineral content can be due to a

thinner bination atomic

bone, a bone of lower density, or a comof both. A change in the effective
number of the bone would also result

in a change in the radiation it.

transmitted

through

Our work has been stimulated by that of Cameron and Sorenson (1963) and we have followed several of their ideas. Cameron and

Sorenson state that some of the ways in which their method differs from earlier methods are:

(1) The transmission

of the photon beam is

measured directly by counting techniques, em-

ploying a scintillation detector system; (2) the

photon beam used is essentially

monochro-

matic; (3) the photon beam and detector are

well coflimated; and (4) the effects of the tis-

sue around the bone are taken into account.

In the present work, the measuring unit was

designed primarily to accommodate a phalanx

as a skeletal sample. In particular, the second

phalanx of the third digit on the left hand was

chosen, since the overlying soft tissue is at a

minimum, and immobilization

during measure-

ment is easily attained.

Thus, correction fac-

tors and errors due to the presence of soft tissue

are at a minimum.

It is true that the lumbar

spine, pelvis, and os calcis show a greater degree

of demineralization

than the small bones of the

hand. However, technical considerations

make

estimates of mineral content of the spine or

pelvis difficult. Cameron and Sorenson have

used the radius of the left arm. Here, the bone

is more massive; but the overlying tissue is

somewhat greater than in a finger. Our choice of the phalanx was further in-

fluenced by the work of Virtama et al. (1960),

Virtama and Mi_hSnen (1960), and Virtama

(1960) who have done considerable

work in

DENSITOMETRY

117

INTERACTION

OF RADL_TION

_'ITlt

IKA2_I*F._

_o

e I t IIIIll

I 1 i IIIIH

I i i Iii[ll

i i i illll

_o _o _, _ _

Ę,o1 I I I111!11 I I ll[!tll

QO_

0.1

I

: _ IilIi11
I0

i i!llllII
ZOO

Fz_vrm 1.--Energy

absorbed

per gram-roentgen

for

bone, nmscle, fat, and air as a function of the photon

energy.

From

BrowneI1, eds.),

Radiation p. 90.

Dosimetry

(Hine

and

correlating the mineral content of the bones of the hand with that of the rest of the skeleton.

Jackson, in 1951_ made preliminary studies on

phalanges, using a wedge of ox bone for comparison. Garn and his co-workers (1963) at the Fels Research Institute have investigated the mineral content of the bones of the hand.

Barnett and Nordin (1961) also used the meta-

carpals to calculate a cortical index. In consideration of the above, we chose the finger as a means to measure mineral content.

A study of the absorptive characteristics

of

muscle and bone tissues in humans or aninmls

by X- or gamma-radiations

reveals that the

greatest discrimination

occurs between 20-

and 30-kilovolt energy photons (Hine and

Brownell, 1956). This is shown in figure 1.

Assuming an effective atomic number of 13.8

for bone, and 7.42 for muscle, the energy ab-

sorption is about 460 and 83.9 ergs/g-r for bone

and muscle, respectively.

From these figures,

we see that the ratio of energy absorbed per

gram of tissue is 460/83.9=5.5

for bone to

muscle. The ratio of bone to fat is still greater.

When scattering characteristics

are taken into

account, as well as absorptive_ still greater differences for bone to muscle are observed and

118

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

expected in a "good" geometry situation, which is the case for these transmission measurements.

A low energy X-ray machine can certainly

produce photons in the range of 20- to 30-kilo-

volt energy; but, in addition, it produces many

photons outside this range.

Furthermore,

the intensity of an X-ray ma-

chine is not inherently stable. On the other

hand, the time rate of output of a radioactive

isotope of sufficiently high strength is very

stable, although it does decay.

A particularly useful isotope for this pur.pose

is 11_-_, which decays by means of electron capture to a 0.354= MeV excited state of Te12t

From this state, tellurium decays by means of

a gamma-ray which is 80% internally con-

verted in the K shell, giving, in turn, two X-ray

photons, K_=27 keV _nd K_=31keV

(Bowe

and Axe], 1952). There are several other radi-

ations such as the characteristic

X-rays from

the L, M, and N shells resulting from electron

capture, conversion electrons, and Auger elec-

trons; but their energy or range is such that

they do not play a role in the present work.

Of the three photons, the K,=27 keV is the

most abundant, accounting for 75% of these

photons per disintegration.

The K_ accounts

for 20% of the total, only 5% remaining as

unconverted 35.4 keV gamma-ray transitions.

Consider the cross section of a finger which

has been compressed

between two parallel

planes, V and U, as shown in figure 2. A

collimated beam of X- and gamma-rays

as

described above is directed along path S. The

transmitted intensity, I, of the beam will equal

the unattenuated

intensity, Io, times the atten-

uation, e-_T t, of the beam due to the soft

tissues, where _r is the linear absorption coefficient in cm-', and t is the thickness of the soft

tissue in centimeters.

This thickness is also

the distance between the parallel planes V and

U. Io is measured by simply removing the

finger from its position From measured values expression

between the two planes. of I, Io, t and the use of

I=Ioe-_T'

(1)

the linear absorption coefficient, t,r, of the soft

tissue is obtained.

In actual practice, it is a

U

CORTICAL

BONE--

SOFT TISSUE

_NTH

PATHS
r

PATH_ 8
F

U'

b

!

MEDULLARY

BONE_

I

I

I

FIGURE

2.--Cross

section of finger between

compression

planes V and U.

VI
parallel

little more reliable to rotate the finger through

90 ░ between the planes V and U, and to make

the measurements

along path R.

When the beam is directed along path expression contains another factor due absorption of the radiation in the bone. expression is

B, the to the
This

I-= Ioe-"T('-b) e-_B_

(2)

where ttB is the linear absorption coefficient of bone in cm-', and b is the thickness of the bone in centimeters.

The thickness b is obtained from measure-

ments of a radiograph of the bone in question.

A magnifying lens system with a built-in reticle

is used to measure the thickness.

The radio-

graph also serves to identify the portion of the

bone where the measurement

is made. A

slotted device, called a finger locator, is calibrated in millimeters and is used to measure

the distance from point in question. in figure 3, which graph of a finger.

the end of the finger to the This device can be seen
also shows a typical radio-

The overall absorption coefficient, _,_, of the

bone is different from the absorption coefficient

of the medullary

and cortical bones. The

expression which permits the evahmtion of the

absorption coefficients of medullary and cortical

bone separately is

I=Ioe-"Mmne-*'OB(_-m)e-"r(t-b)

(3)

where _MB
DCB

is the absorption coefficient lary bone in cm -_, is the absorption coefficient cal bone in cm -1, and

of medulof corti-

.*

IODIXE- 1 2 5 BOAT DEXSITOMETRY

119

FIGURE3.-Film of finger in locater, calibrated in millimeters. Sonscreen film n-ith target-film distance 100 em.
m is the thickness of t,he medullaqbone in cm.
The other terms are defined as abore. Tlie thickness of medullary bone is found by means of the radiograph. I f a d u e of pMB is determined separately, the absorption coefficient of cortical bone can be determined.
Bone consists of supporting tissue plus hydroxyapatite (effectire atomic number 16.65). I f -ii-etake R layer of 11-droq-apatite,o r niaterial having the same effective atomic number and of a thickness as to gire the same attenuation in the P ' j beam as is @\-en by an unknown bone in riro. the density of the in vivo bone can be determined. This assumes that the mass absorption coefficient, pR/pB, equals that of the bone, pB!pB. and that there is negligible absorption of the radiation in the supporting tissue.

source shield, is collimated by an insert of brass. Beam diameters from 0.3 to 2.0 mm have been used.
The object to be measured, i.e., the finger, is held immobile by means of t v o plastic plates. The plates are milled out in the region of measurement but are quite thick elsewhere. These
plates are shown in figure 5. The beam is detected by a thallium-activated,
2-mm-thick sodium iodide crystal. To preTent light and moisture from entering the crystal, it is corered on the entrance side of a 0.13-mni berryllium foil. This foil absorbs only about 1%of the radiation because of its small thickness and low atomic number. Since the photon energies I"j are quite lox. the cqstal is R req- efficient detector from which r e r j little e n e r g escapes. The crystal is surrounded by another shield to reduce the background radintion m-hich rearlies the cq-stal. This shield contains a collimator hole 3 mm in diameter (see fig. 4 ) .

TO DISCR IM I NATOR AND SCALER

HIGH VOLTAGE FOR

/

PHOTOMULTIPLIER

I1

HOUSING

COLLlMATOR
( 3mm Dia HOLE 1\

FINGER LOCATOR

1NSTRUMENTATION
The is taken up from :I solution 1))- :I small amount of ion-exchange resin .r?;-hichis then used as the source. This iodine containing resin is placed in a small, cylindrically-shaped plastic capsule, and is sealed by ineans of a n "0"ring and a thin plastic corer plate. The cylinder is placed in a brass source shield Kith a sliding shutter which is controlled bj- an electromagnet. as sho\~i-nin figure 4. Tlie beam, a s it leaves the

u
i
SOURCE SHiELD
FIGTRE4-Diagram of source and detector. The source and detector sector across immobile object.

120

DEVELOPMENT O F METHODS IN BONE DENSSITOMETRY

*.

pulse height spectrum is shown in figure 6. A

*

Baird-Atomic Cambridge Series Model sC107

scaler and Cambridge Model SC905 timer are

used. The unit can be set to count for a present

time, or a preset number of counts. The ap-

paratus is shown in figure 5. T o facilitate data

recording, the total counts, if the counting time

is preselect,ed,or time, if the total counts are pre-

selected, is automatically recorded on paper

tape from a Hewlett Packard Digital Recorder.

The power supply for the photomultiplier is a

John Fluke Model 405.

FIGUR5E.-Instrument in use. Parallel plates hold finger immobile.

The entire unit is normally programmed to make transmission measurements across the entire width of the finger automatically. The

The light pulses, which result when the Xand gamma-rays interact with the crystal, are picked up by a photomultiplier. The photomultiplier is followed by a preamplifier, amplifier, and by a single channel analyzer which actually operates as a discriminator. All

finger is held immobile, but the source and detector are mounted on a frame which is driven laterally across the finger by means of a drive motor coupled through an electric clutch and brake to a lend screw. Mensiirements are made at 1-mm intervals. During each measurement

pulses below a preset pulse-height level are re- period, the source and detector are held fixed.

jected. All pulses above that level are sent to a The electric brake is energized to insure that the

scaling circuit to be counted. A differential lead screw is not rotated, thus preventing the

3
0 3000
0
5
3
5 2500
0>
0 2000
0
L w a
I500
w
Ia-
U
" 1000
5
I-
z
83 500

0 NO ABSORBER, COUNTS PER MINUTE
0 2 . 5 c m MASONITE ABSORBER, COUNTS PER TWO MINUTES

0

0

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

PULSE HEIGHT IN VOLTS

FIQUR6E.-Pulse height vs. counting rate, P .

9

10

IOBEqE- 12 5 BONE DENSITO_ETRY

121

source and detector from moving. Following a

counting intem, al, the brake is de-energized and

the clutch is energized, allowing the motor to

turn the lead screw one revolution.

One re-

volution corresponds to a 1-mm movement of

the source-detector

carriage.

During this off

period, the digital recorder is activated and

prints out the time or the counts for the pre-

vious interval.

Upon completion of the l-ram

movement, the ........

* "_

Ę ,.1..o

over. This process is continued until the entire

finger has been measured.

DATA HANDLING

Equation ('2) relates the initial intensity of the beam to the intensity as altered by the presence of the finger. Solving this equation for the absorption coefficient, gs, gives

lnl/Io+ttr( t--b)

ttB =

b

(4)

where the terms of the equation are as defined

above. The right-hand

side of the equation

contains five independently

observed quantities.

It is useful to consider the measurement uncer-

tainties of each of these quantities and to es-

tablish their relationship to the uncertainty of

the absorption coefficient of bone. The funda-

mental formula can be used:

of the propagation

of errors

X.ax_/ /

where a r is the standard deviation of a function

]of the independently

observed quantities x_,

x2..., zn with their respective tions al, if2, Ę Ę., fin.

standard

devia-

Considering the dependent variable to be gB

from equation (4), one obtains

If a series of measurements

of the above

quantities is made standard deviations can be made about

on an individual and the are calculated, a statement the standard deviation of

computed values of gs from the mean value,

using equation (6). It is necessary to obtain

this standard deviation to be able to distinguish

between the uncertainty

of an individual de-

termination and a spread of values in a population of pcmons. We find that it is p,c_ib!e to obtain values of am to about +-1% when each

of the individual quantities is carefully meas-

ured. In the quantities high number of counts rected for background

I and Io, a sufficiently must be taken and corcounts.

USE OF APPARATUS

Our measurements

are expressed as linear

coefficients of absorption of total bone (m).

The total thickness of the phalanx is easily

measured.

A bone (fig. 7) of equal total diam-

eter but with a thinner cortex will give a lower

linear coefficient of absorption.

Osteomalacia

bone would also give a lower linear coefficient

of absorption.

We have performed a study on postmeno-

pausal females with and without hormone

therapy.

We will present the results tomor-

row. We have followed osteoporotic patients,

male and female, on hormone therapy and

have started a project to do serial measurements

of patients on cortisone therapy.

The appa-

ratus can also be utilized for studies of animals,

such as the rabbit. Figure 8 demonstrates the frontal and lateral views of the tibia of a rabbit.

Figures 9 and 10 demonstrate

the frontal and

from-above views of the rabbit holder. Figure

11 shows the rabbit in place with the tibia in

position to be measured.

1_

1_

t--b _2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

(6)
where al, alo, _r, _,-b, and _b are the individual standard diviations of the quantities 1, Io, gr, (t--b), and b.

The authors would like to express their thanks to Donald Charleston, Robert Beck, and John C. Wood for assistance with the elec-

tronics problems.

Dr. Paul V. Harper kindly

loaned us our first I _ source during prelim-

inary testing.

E. Duthorn and A. Cox helped

with the patient measurements.

122

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

a

.

T

\

I

\

I
-I MEDULLARY BONE

CORTICAL B O N E THICKNESS C ' + C" FIGUR7E.-Difference in thickness of cortical bone of normal and osteoporotic bone.

FIGUR8E.-Radiographs of rabbit tibiae in frontal (left) and lateral (right) views.

IODIXE- 125 BOSE DESSITOSlETRY

123

FIGCRlOE.-Tiem of rabbit holder from above.

~~~

-

FIGLX9E.--T'ierc of rabbit holder from front.

F I G ~ R11E.-Holder with rabbit in place to measure transmission through right tibia.

REFERENCES
ALBRIGHTF, . ; and REIFEKSTEIX,E. C., Jr. : Parathyroid Glands and Metabolic Bone Disease. The Williams and Wilkins Cornpang. Baltimore, 1948.
ALBRIGHTF, . ; S m n c . P. H. : and RICHBDSOS, A. 31. : Postmenopausal Osteoprosis. Its Clinical Features. J. Am. Xed. AQROCr..o1. 116. May 19-11. pp. 2-16.%2474.
BARSETT.E. ; and SORDBI.SE. . C. : The Clinical and Radiologiical Problem of Thin Bones. Brit. J. Radiol.. rol. 34. SOT19.61.pp. 6831692.
BOIVEJ. . C.; and AXEL,P . : Decay of TeIZ'm. Phgs. Rer.. rol. 85. Mar. 1952. p. 858. CAvERos. J. R. ; and ROREXSOSJ,. : Measurement of Bone Mineral in Viro : An Improved
Method. Science, rol. 112.no. 3589. Oct. 19G3, p. -E%. DOTLE.F.H.: Ulnar Bone Mineral Concentration in Metabolic Bone Diseases. Brit. J.
Radiol., rol. 34, S o r . 1961, pp. 69Si12. GARS, S. 11.: R o x x a s s . C . G.: and SOLAPS.. Jr.: Studies on the Derelopment of
Compact Bone, in Sormal Individuals and in Endocrine and Sutritional Abnormalities. Final Progress Report P a r t 1, Department of Growth and Genetics. Fels Research Institute. Tellow Springs. Ohio, Dec. 31.1963. GERSHOS-COHESJ. . ; CHERRYS. . H.: and BOEHSKE,31.: Bone Density Studies With a Gamma Gage. Radiation Res.. ~ o l8. , June 1958. pp. 50!3-515.
792-963 0 4 6 9

124

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

HARRISON, M. ; FRASER, R. ; and MULLEN, B. : Calcium Metabolism

in Osteoporosis.

vol. 1, May 1965, pp. 1015-1019. HINE and BROWNELL, eds. : Radiation

Dosimetry.

Academic

Press, Inc., New

Lancet, York, 1956,

90 pp. JACKSON, H.: Problems

in the Measurement

of Bone Density.

Brit. J. Radiol.,

vol. 24,

Nov. 1951, pp. 613_16. LANZL, L. H. ; and STRANDJORD, N. M. : Radioisotopic

Device for Measuring

Bone Mineral.

Symposium of Technology MAYER, E. H.;

on Low Energy X and Gamma

Research

Institute,

Chicago,

TROSTLE, I'i. G. ; ACKERMAN,

Sources and Applications, Illinois, Oct. 1964. E.; SCHRAER, H. ; and

Illinois SITTLER,

Institute O. D. : A

Scintillation

Counter

Technique

for the X-Ray Determination

of Bone Mineral

Con-

tent.

Radiation

Res., vol. 13, July 1960, pp. 156-167.

MAYO, K. M. : Quantitative

Measurement

of Bone Mineral

Content

in Normal

Adult Bone.

Brit. NOaDIN,
Am.

J. Radiol., vol. 34, Nov. 1961, pp. 693_698.

B. E. C. : Calcium

Balance

and Calcium

J. Clin. Nutr., vol. 10, May 1962, pp. 384-390.

Requirement

in Spinal

Osteoporosis.

NORDIN, B. E. C. : The Pathogenesis 1015.

of Osteoporosis.

Lancet, vol. 1, May 1961, pp. 1011-

NORDIN, B. E. C. ; BARNET, E. ; MACGREGOR, J. ; and NISBIT, J. : Lumbar Spine Densitometry.

Brit. Mal. J., vol. 1, June 1962, pp. 1793-1796.

OMNELL, KARL-AKE: Quantitative

Roentgenologic

Studies on Changes

in Mineral

Content

of Bone in vivo. Acta Radiol. Suppl. 148, 1957, pp. 7-86.

P_GH, D.G. : Roentgenologic

Diagnosis

of Diseases

of Bone.

The Williams

and Wilkins

Company,

Baltimore,

408 pp., 1954.

URIST, M. R. : The Etiology of Osteoporosis.

URIST, M. R. : The Problem

of Osteoporosis.

VIRTAMA, P.: Variations

in the Ash Contents

J. Am. Med. Clin. Res., of Bones

Assoc., Feb. 1959. vol. 6, Nov. 1958,
of the Extremities.

pp. 377-385. Ann. Med.

Exptl. Biol. Fenniae. Vm'rAMA, P. ; KAJA._0JA,

(Helsinki), P. ; HoPsu,

vol. 38, 1960, pp. 127-132. V. K. ; and TELKKA, A. : Density

of Human

Carpal,

Metacarpal

and Digital Bones.

Ann. Med. Exptl. Biol. Fenniae

(Helsinki),

vol. 38,

1960, pp. 467471.

VIRTAMA, P.; and MAH0_EN,

H.:

Mineral

Content

of Human

Thickness

of

Finger

Bones.

the Cortical

Layer

Brit. J. Radiol.,

as an Estimate

of

voL 33, Jan. 1960,

pp. 6(N62. VOSE, G. P. : X-Ray

Transmission

July 1958, pp. 96-101.

Factor in Estimating

Bone Density.

Radiology,

vol. 71,

.Ę

COMMENTS

Dr. S.'_[ITH. I am not sure why you distinguished

between compact bone and trabecular

bone in the mid-

dle phalanx

of the third finger.

What difference

does

it make, because

it seems to me that this is a bone

whose compact portion is not too well defined at times.

Dr. STRANDJORD. It is very well defined.

Dr. SMITH. V_'hat difference

does it make if it is

compact ? Dr. STRANDJORD. We are counting

it, too. If you

did want to count cortical bone thickness,

you would

have to take the medullary

cavity out of it. Our fig-

ures will be in linear coefficients

of absorption

of total

bone.

Dr. URIST. This issue of the kind of bone raises the

question, what is the effect of the packing of the apatite

crystal, what is the relationship

between the packing

of the apatite crystal respect to the organic

(the crystal orientation)

with

material

in the bone and the

radio density as it is measured

by all of these differ-

ent methods?

This question

always comes up when

you consider the various

that radio density is so very different

in

kinds of bone structure

that you can see

this immediately

with the naked eye. What you see

is that the leas_t dense bone is trabecular

bone. The

next less dense bone is dentine.

Then comes lamellar

bone. The lamellar bone is less dense than the Haver-

sian bone, which is less dense bone than the inter-

medullary

bone of the laying

dense than calcified

cartilage,

hen. This bone is less

and cartilage

is less

dense than enamel.

In this bone the crystals are not oriented with respect

to the fiber structure.

In the calcified cartilage

you

have flowers of mineral.

In enamel, of course, you

have the beautiful

large crystal structure

in a cham-

ber, always

relatively

oriented

with respect

to the

long axis of the chamber.

In Haversian

bone it is

like plywood;

it goes in all directions.

The question

I would like to ask physicists,

Dr. Oameron

and

óm

IODINE- 12 5 BONE DENSITOMETRY

125

Dr. Strandjord,

is what are we seeing?

Are we seeing

the calcium?

Are we seeing the apatite?

Are we

seeing the relationship

between

the inorganic

solids

and the organic material?

In all of these different

forms of tissue are there different

ground rules for

each one because of, first, tal size, second, crystal ratio of matrix to mineral.

the kinds of crystals

orientation,

and

and crysthird, the

Dr. I_NZL. I might try to answer part of that briefly,

namely, that what you are seeing is absorption by the

various

atomic constituents.

We do not distinguish

_._,._

I_ _,. L,_ _L,_LU Of _ __l*.1.v _t4at or riot. There

is a kind of artifact,

though, when you use a broad

beam as against a narrow beam.

The former is sensi-

tive to positioning

; the latter is not.

Dr. BABCOCK. With regard to Dr. Urist's question

as

to what we measure,

of the measurement

that we make

of bone segment cut up after dissection,

of the opera-

tional bone mass unit, 93% is bone ash, that is, min-

eral content that Of the remaining and 4% is water much of this 93%

is left after ashing at 600 degrees.

7%, 3% of our measurement

is fat

and protein.

We do not know how

ash is calcium.

Dr. Umsv. Let us add three more parameters.

Tra-

becular bone is more dense than muscle.

Muscle is

more dense than water, and fat is less dense than water.

The question

is: Can these methods

distinguish

be-

tween organic substances

and inorganic

solids?

Dr. STRANDJORD. The reason we have difficulty

in

detecting

these is that we are looking at the thickness

of bone and its linear coefficient

absorption,

and we

are lumping all of this together.

For a given outside

diameter of this bone, we can measure quite accurately

the linear coefficient

absorption.

After subtracting

the known soft tissue, which is measured,

we can take

out that factor.

Then we are saying that this bone

absorbs this much X-ray and is it different

from

patient

to patient,

is it different

with various diseases?

between

patients

Dr. NORriS. How many microcuries

would

Dr. Cameron use in order to get a continuous

instead of an individual

one in the phalanx

forearm ?

you and recording
and the

Dr. I_NZL I do not have an answer, but we prefex

to do it in a fixed rather than in a moving situation.

In a sense we do not use continuous

recording.

Dr. NORVlN. Why do you prefer it fixed? It is much

better to do it continuously.

Dr. LaNZL. YOU run into time resolving problems of your equlpment_

Dr. MALETSKOS. In one case you use a ratemeter,

in

the other case you use a scaler.

For what they want

to do, the accuracy they are getting is apparently

suffi-

cient for them. If you want to do something

else, as

Dr. Cameron

described

today, I am sure the _xrce

strength goes up quite a bit.

Dr. BABCOCK. The drive continues across the radius,

using a 0.3-second time constant. in about 10 or 20 seconds requires

To accomplish

this

a source of approxi-

mately 30 inc. To do it intermittently

or to do it in a

small chicken bone, driving across more slowly, requires

a Source of only 3 to 5 inc.

Dr. NORDIN. This compares

with a dose of 15 pc

being used in the other procedures.

Dr. L_NZL The figure is closer to 7.

Dr. NORDIN. In fact, there is a difference of a thousand-fold.

in the order

Dr. STRANDJORD. We have used a continuous ing, too, but it is not as accurate_

record-

Dr. MALETSKOS. It is essentially

the product of time

and activity that you are interested in.

Dr. CAMEROn. Are your absorption

data for photo-

electric only, or is this just

photoelectric

and compton_

involved in that aspect?

an average term including or don't you want to get

Dr. COHEn. Isn't the first term compton? Dr. CAX(ERON. The first term he said was That could be compton.

scatter.

Dr. about berlin

LANZL. It is scatter.

I would like to say a word

"good" and "poor" geometry.

If you have a

impinging

on a target of some sort and if you

have a detector

in so-called poor geometry,

you see an

attenuated

beam because the primary

beam is attenu-

ated.

If the beam is sCcriking the whole absorber,

yon

have the probability

of getting scattered

photons at the

detector

position.

In this case you will get a higher

reading than in the second case where you have a col-

limated beam, an absorber,

and a detector.

You have

attenuation

from the same target_ but the intensity

reaching

the point will be less because you are not

irradiating

all of the absorber.

This is one of the

difficulties

of broad beam or poor geometry.

Using a bone wedge nearby, and a film detector which

does not have any buckeye diaphragm,

the X-ray beam

gives both the primary

_gnal and a scattered

signal

from _me other part. That introduces

a complication

which you do not have in the good geometry

situation.

Dr. CAMERO._. YOU use the symbol B, which is your

bone thickness

in various positions.

How do you meas-

ure your bone thickness ?

Dr. LaNZL We have a holder in which we put the

hand of the individual.

We take two exposures.

We

measure the thickness

across the bone.

Dr. CAMERON. IS this minus the medullary

canal?

Dr. LANZL I include the medullary

canal.

In other

words, I am saying that this is bone.

My colleague

tells me there are two different is bone nonetheless.

kinds of bone, but this

We have to be careful

becatLse if the hand is not

against film, there is a very slight enlarging.

So far, we have just measured

this distance

on the

film with a lens and a reticle.

This is perhaps a weak

point because I think our technique

might not be as

good as others presented

earlier today or yesterday.

Dr. MALETSKOS. I would like to return now briefiy

to the problem of linearization.

The question that was

asked yesterday

was whether the machine used by Dr.

Mack was designed and works in a way that makes the

126

DEVELOPMENT

OF METt-IODS

transformation

in such a way that the answer

is in

remus equivalent or bone mass.

either to aluminum We are concerned

thickness

or mass

only with the

principle. Now the question

is, does the instrument

do this? I

am not going into the details of the instrument;

I am

going into what equipment.
The instrument

I think is the very heart of the

has a potentiometer.

There is an

arm which can be lnoved around.

The signal comes in

at a point, in effect, and moves the arm around to

indicate a certain response.

Eventually

this is recorded

on the paper. Mechanically

tied in with this is another

potenti-

ometer which also has an arm that moves at the same

angle as the first because they are tied together,

and

from this another signal is tapped off. In the ordinary

potentiometer,

the voltage would be proportional

to the

distance traveled.

What you would like to do is to get a si_░nal

on the second potentiometer

which is not directly

mechanically

coupled to the first. Rather,

you im-

pose a potential

distribution

from zero

to maximum

resistance

which is exactly

resistance equal to

the shape of the calil)ration

curve.

Once you have

done that, if a signal comes in which is a resl_)nse and

moves the first pointer so far on the i)otentiometer,

the

second automatically

moves and automatically

nmkes

the analogy

of going from point to point.

Once you

lmve done that you have transformed

your signal into

terms of aluminum

thickness.

Now you can do what-

ever you want with the result.

In the original instru-

mentation,

the final curve only w'ls shown.

Dr. Mack's

equipment

has another

curve.

What is wanted

chart which shows another is the area under this curve.

They happen to have an integrated

unit, but that is

not necessary

to the argument

at the moment.

The analogy

between

these

is performed

by mechanical

coupling

two potentiometers,

one of which is

adjusted

by all the knobs you have seen on the dia-

grams so that the distribution

of voltage is exactly

proportional

to the shape of the curve.

In my opinion,

the instrument

does what was in-

tended, namely,

it makes an analog transformation.

q'he difficulty, linearization.

I believe comes in the use of the word If now you want to check your instru-

ment, you would rerun the curve through

and the

result would be a straight line. All this means is that

you have set the distribution

of potential

in exactly

the same shape. tion has perhaps

I think the use of the word lineariza-

been misleading.

What you are actu-

ally doing is performing

an analog transformation.

Dr. GARN. I think this probably There is a point or set of points

puzzles some people. at either end of any

sensimetric

or densimetrie

curve beyond which you

may not go. If you go beyond those points, further

change in transmission

or density (whatever

way you

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

are working

it), you will not get a meaningful

picture "

of change

in wedge equivalent

thickness.

The im-

portant

point is that perhaps this is, in effect, a danger

signal.

It is a point or a set of points beyond which

they ordinarily

will not go.

Dr. LANZL. What you are

marize, is that you can misuse

misuse it then you had better

with the data.

That is what

saying,

if I may sum-

an instrument.

If you

be careful what you do

you say when you are

going to two extremes. Dr. CAMERON. I don't

think

it is wrong

with those

two extremes.

It is less accurate.

It is important

not to say it is wrong because it is not wrong.

It can

be less sensitive

and this may be a problem.

Dr. GARN. It is not just a loss in sensitivity

but

actually

very wrong and can be obtained

at the two

points which I have called roll-off.

Dr. ROCKOFF. I nOW understand

Dr. Mack was attemI)ting

in theory.

the operation I would

that like to

explain why this problem came up. Among the data

that were sent to us to evaluate

was one of Dr. Mack's

publications

which showed the nonlinearized

original

film response

curve (what she refers to as the linear-

ized tracing on the same scale).

No scale values were

given and nowhere

in the text was there a reference

to different

scales.

Believing

they were put on the

same scale added some confusion

to our analyses.

It

is now clear that the principle

of the instrumenta-

tion is valid and. if the work was being done correct-

ly, that this transformation

could be done in a valid

fashion.

The questions

left to be answered,

wl_ich are not

within the domain of this conference

per se, concern

the precision

and accuracy

and inherent

biases in the

system that is being used. I do not believe that the

linearization

technique,

as Dr. Mack calls it, if it is

being used correctly,

is a source of that bias at the

moment.

Dr. 3"ENd:INS. I would like to thank Dr. Roekoff and

Dr. Zelen for assisting

NASA and this working confer-

enee by examining

Dr. _Iack's technique.

They have

also recommended

some very critical experiments

which

Dr. Mack has been conducting

recently,

which sh_

presented

as an important

part

I have participated

in many

sions and I think that some

of her of the of the

paper. detailed homework

discusthat

was done for this working conference

ha_ pointed out a

number of the critical problems

which this working

conference

conht discuss.

If this had not been done,

we would not have made as much progress. Dr. MALETSKOS. We have been discussing

different

kinds of electromagnetic

radiation

and the use of densi-

tometry

this morning.

There are other methods

of

getting different kinds of electromagnetic

radiation.

The next paper will explain one method which can

eventually

have use in this densitometric

technique.

-6

of 19-Excited X-ray Sources

J, J, Ezop and T. G. SrrNci-mo_m liT Research Institute

Although

the outputs of isotopic X-ray

sources are not as high as those of conventional

machine sources, they do have many valuable

features such as portability,

compactness, sta-

bility, low initial and maintenance

cost, and

no power requirement.

The prospective uses

of these sources is therefore quite promising.

There are three clasps of isotopic X-ray

sources: direct X-ray or y-emitters, fl-excited

X-ray sources, and a-excited sources. The di-

rect X-ray or _-ray is either emitted from the

nuc!nus following electron capture or fl-decay or is emitted from the atomic K and L shells

following electron capture or internal conver-

sion. 1125 and Am z41 are examples of this type of isotopic source and have been discussed in

previous papers. In the fl-excited X-ray source

the X-rays are produced by the stopping of fl-

rays much as the X-rays are produced in a con-

ventional X-ray machine by the stopping of

electrons.

The continuous

bremsstrahlung

spectrum produced by the stopping of the betas

is peaked by the K-edge in self-absorption

of

the X-rays in the target. In addition there is

K shell X-ray emission both from atoms ionized

directly by the betas and from atoms ionized

by the bremsstrahlung

(fluorescence).

The

a-excited sources emit X-rays only by K shell

X-ray emission from atoms ionized directly by the alphas. Because there are no bremsstrah-

lung X-rays, the intensity from a-excited sources

is relatively low ; but this disadvantage

is offset

by the extreme sharpness from the target.

of the K X-Pay line

Because the fl-excited X-ray sources offer

much flexibility in choice of geometry and

source and target materials, the development

and application of/3-excited X-ray sources have

been carried out initermittently

over the past

14 years at IIT Research Institute and else-

where. This paper summarizes the research

performed at IITRI by many investigators,

the more extensive work having been done by

L. Reiffel, C. A. Stone, L. Voyvodic, and Italo

Filosofo. The investigations

consisted of four

phases: first, an experimental

survey on X-ray

production using sources of several energies,

targets of various thicknesses and atomic num-

bers, and various geometries;

second, an

analytical study to understand

and interpret

these experiments;

next, an application of the

results of the study to design and build several

high level intensity prototype sources having

characteristics

optimized for given applica-

tions; and finally, the utilization of the proto-

type sources in several typical applications

to

demonstrate

the widespread

these sources.

potential uses of

Some of these investigations

were sponsored

by the Division of Isotopes Development of the

U.S. Atomic Energy Commission.

EXPERIMENTdL PRODUCTION

SURVEY

OF X-RdY

Because of their ready availability, low cost,

and long half-lives, our experimental

work has

been concerned mainly with the use of the fis-

sion-product

fl-emitters:

Pm x*7, Kr sS, and

127

128

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENS.ITOMETBY

Sr-Y% These emitters are typical of low, medium, and high energv sources: respectively. O_her workers have used tritium (absorbeA in titanium 5r zirconium), Ca 45 and p32.
An extensive experimental survey has been made of the X-ray output from sources using these fl-emitters with a variety of target materials ranging from copper to uranium. Five different geometrical arrangements have been
used :
1. Transmission, where the target material is placed between the fl-souree and the X-ray detector;
2. Reflection at 180 ░ where the fl-source is placed between the target and the detector;
3. Sandwich, the target material on both sides of the beta source;
4. Reflection at 90 ░, where the X-rays are detected at 90 ░ to _he fl-particle direction, the target being at 45 ░ to both; and
5. Mixture geometry, with the fl-emitter intimately mixed with the target material.
A fl stopper of lucite was inserted between the fl-source and the detector in all those measurements where the target thickness was not enough to stop all the betas. The X-ray spectra and intensities were studied primarily with a NaI (T1) scintillation spectrometer and a pulse height analyzer. In all the measurements _he detectors have been shielded, and the X-rays detected through a lead collimator lined with cadmium and copper layers to eliminate high energy fluorescent lead X-rays.
The detailed results of these studies have been
reported quantitatively and are in approximate agreement with similar results by other investigators as reviewed by starfelt et al. They may be summarized qualitatively by the following general statements :
1. The sandwich geometry is shown to be the most efficient geometry for high energy fl-emitters (such as Sr-Yg░).
2. The mixture geometry is shown to be the most efficient geometry for low energy fl emitters (such as Pm147).
3. The 90 ░ geometry shows the best peak

purity (i.e., the least intensity at energies different from the K X-ray peak). 4. For sandwich and transmission geometries, the intensities of the K X-ray peak first increase and then decrease as the
target thickness is increased, the optimum thickness being defined as that at which the maximum occurs in the
intensity of the K X-ray peak. 5. For all geometries, an increase in target
thickness is accompanied by an increased attenuation of the bremsstrahlung continuum at energies just higher than the K absorption edge which results in an increased narrowing of the peak. 6. Optimum thicknesses are lower for lower fl energy. 7. The peak intensity for a given target material (i.e., a given K peak energy) increases with increasing fl energy. 8. The peak purity for a given target material (i.e., a given K peak energy,) generally decreases (due to an increasing bremsstrahlung high energy tail) as the fl energy increases beyond values an order of magnitude higher than the K peak energy.

ANALYTICAL PRODUCTION

STUDY OF X-RAY

To aid in the design of new sources with specific performance characteristics, an approximate mathematical formulation has been de-
veloped by analytically studying the results of the experimental survey just described. One can assume an isotropic distribution of the X-rays at their production by fl excitation and can consider the propagation of these X-rays in a limited solid angle about a direction normal to external slab targets. Viewing the X-ray yield as governed by the two processes, production by fl excitation and self-absorption in these slab targets, the yield Y(W,t) of photons of energy W per fl particle striking a target of thickness t has been approximated by the expression

Y (W,t) _ N(W) fo' A_(W,t')Ao(W,t')dt'

DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS

OF fl-EXCITED

X-RAY

SOURCES

129

where N(W) represents the total number of X-rays produced per beta stopping in a thick target, A_ (W,t')dt' represents the fraction of these produced in the differential thickness dr',

and A, (W,t') represents the absorption func-

tion for the X-rays from the point of their pro-

duction to their emergence from the target.

The absorption of betas in the external target

can be represented by an exponential law

(Evans, 1955). For the fl absorption coefficient

we have used _=8/R_x

which reflects the

experimental evidence of a fl half thickness of about one-tenth the maximum range. We have further assumed that the fraction of the X-rays produced in a differential target thickness de' is equal to the fraction of the betas absorbed in the same thickness.

For the source-target mixture we have assumed that all the betas are absorbed near the

point of their emission, and hence As dt'_-dt'/t,

i.e., equal probability of X-ray emission throughout the target thickness. This is a

good approximation in the case of low energy

B emitters for which this geometry is particularly attractive.

With these functions the photon yield functions for fl-excited X-ray sources are obtained as follows:

Transmission Geometry

Yr(W, t)=N(W)

_

(e-_--e-_

I_-- I,t.z

topr_._lg/_--lg _
P=--/_
Reflection Geometry

t) photonsfl_ (1) (2)

Fn(W, t)=N(W)

u_ [1--e -_-_')t] photons/#

(3)

Sandwich Geometry (Back Target, t>Rmu)

Ys(W, t)--N(_W) _--_ ( e-',t--e-_,)]

-4-_t_q-u_ e -_ photons/0 (4)

t.,t= lg (ttBA-u_)--lg 2_

(5)

Source-Target Mixture (Low Energy Emitters)

Y_OV, t)=N(W)

(1--e-_) u_t

photons/# (t> R._.) (6)

Calculated optimum thicknesses based on these results are compared with experimental optimum thicknesses in table I. The agreement is encouraging_ considering the, approximate nature of the treatment.
For the thick target production functions N(W), approximate expressions were used for the bremsstrahlung continuum and for the characteristic radiation due to K-shell ionization by the fl-particles. These expressions were adapted from Evans, Heitler and Burhop. Table II lists the resultant formulas along with numerical estimates for tin and lead tar-
gets. In this table, N_, denotes the contributions to the K peak from the portion of the continuum (between W_ and W_) which leads to bremsstrahlung peaking just below the K absorption edge; Nbt represents the integral photon production at energies above the absorption edge. This term is helpful for estimating the degree of K peak purity and also for the contribution of fluorescent K X-rays due to photoelectric absorption within the target. The quantity N_, is the X-ray production due to K shell ionization. The total number of
photons produced in the K peak per fl-particle absorbed in a thick target is then given by
N ( W) =Nbv+ Nks + GNbt
G represents the fraction of the photons in the high energy bremsstrahlung tail which, upon absorption, give rise to a fluorescent K photon. This factor depends on the geometry. The dependence is such as to suggest a low value of G for transmission, sandwich, and reflection geometries, and a high value for 90 ░ geometry and mixture geometry. In table II, two values are shown for the calculated yield Y(W,topt) : one computed for G=O and one for G=I. Also shown are the measured values from the
results of the experimental survey. These values, in general, lie below the calculated values by factors of 2 or less. The agreement is better for the higher energies, which may be

130
TABLE I.--Calculated

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

a_d Experimental

Optimum Thickness K Photon Peaks

o/Slab

Targets for Tin and Lead

source

pm147

KrS5

y_0

Ema,-- MeV ..............................

Tw2-- yrs ................................

Rm a*-- mg/c m2 ............................

Sn(l/_=

110 mg/cm2) :

Sandwich ................. topt-- mg/cm 2..............

_Exp ...... ]Calc ......

Transmission

.............

topt-- mg/cm 2..............

_Exp ...... ]Calc ......

Pb (1/us = 660 mg/cm 2) :

Sandwich ................. to,t-- mg/cm 2 ..............

_Exp ...... ]Calc ......

Transmission

.............

to,t-- mg/cm 2 ..............

_ Exp ...... ]Calc ......

0.226 2.6 50
12 15 18 18

0.67 10. 3 250
........ 36 54 55

2.2 27. 7 1100
70 58 110 124

25

...... i;; ....

30

100

25O

31

100

272

TABLE II.--Caleulated

and Experimental

Optimum X-Ray Yields From Slab Targets for Tin and

Lead K Pkoton Peaks

_-Source

pm147

Kr85

Y

Z of target
Yb_
Nb_

Y(W, to_t)

sandwich sandwich transmission transmission transmission

G=0 G= 1
G=0 G= 1 experimental

50(Sn) 0. 13 0. 36 0. 40 0. 53 0. 89 0.44 0. 74 0. 45 0. 75 0.3

82(Pb) 0. 14 0. 15 0. 06 0. 20 0. 35 0. 19 0. 33 0 19 0. 33
<0.1

50(Sn) 0. 46 2.0 2.0 2. 46 4. 46 1.4 2.5 1.5 2.7 0.7

82(Pb) 0. 56 1.7 0.2 0. 76 2. 46 0.65 2.1 0.65 2.1 1.0

50(Sn) 1.5
10. 7 6.6 8.1
18. 8 2.0 4.7 2.7 6.2 2.2

82(Pb) 1.9
11.5 0.7 2.6
14. 1 1.6 8.8 1.7 9.3 3.3

Formulas

Used:

N(W) = Nbp+ Nk,+ GNb,

Nb_ 2k \E ....

Errns
Nb,_2k(_m_.)

2
ZE_,,

(ig _--1+

Nk_5.4NI@

(-o.]

,,Em_,

_░K(Z)Z-4E_"

Emax/]Wab_

for Em_.>l

MeV

Nk,= 1.5X10"_K(Z) Values Used:

Z-' LkE,_,,/[/E""_2 Emaz2--Wab2]

for E_,<0.1_

k=7X 10-4MeV-1;

Em------'_=0.45;

=0.33; *0_=1

MeV

o,

DESIGN

AND APPLICATIONS

OF fl-EXCITED

X-RAY SOURCES

131

due to less absorption of betas in emerging through the windows of the source. It is encouraging that this rough analytical treatment gives results ag-reeing as well as this_ for one can now use this method of analysis to predict K photon yields correct to within a factor of 2.

PROTOTYPE

SOURCE DESIGN

furnish a basis for desiglfing isotopic X-ray

sources. Maximum output is obtained with

confi_Jrations

corresponding

dimensions, but limitations

to optimum target exist due to the

finite specific activity of the fl-emitter and to the desired size of the isotopic source. Using

external targets, the thickness of the fl-source,

including encapsulation,

must be small as com-

pared with the maximum B-range. If a small

X-ray focal spot is desired, the volume of the

fl-enunitter and the maximum X-ray output

are limited. When large area X-ray sources

are acceptable or desired, a limit in the X-ray

output is determined only by the area of the

X-ray source; and a high X-ray flux can be achieved.

As in the external target geometries, a limit

in the maximum X-ray output per unit of

source area also exists for the source-target

mixtures.

Here, however, the X-ray output is

an asymptotic function of the source thickness; and considerations of the costs of fl-emitter and

source fabrication can indicate which fraction

of the X-ray saturation venient to achieve.

output is most con-

In designing an isotopic X-ray source, the

desired X-ray spectral distribution is the major

factor in the choice of the fl-emitter.

The ex-

perimental

and analytical results of the pre-

vious paragraphs

indicate that K peak yield

and "purity"

depend strongly on fl-energy.

For X-ray outputs peaking at characteristic

radiation of medium Z targets (from zirconium

to tungsten), the low energy fl-emitters are the

most advantageous.

For high Z targets (lead,

uranium), only the high energy fl-emitters give

a high yield of X-rays. Although high energy

betas produce, in general, a large amount of

high energy bremsstrahlung,

the peak purity is,

at. least for high Z targets, satisfactory for most

of the source applications. As far as K X-ray yield and purity is con-

cerned, one should follow the general rule of

high energy B-emitters combined with high Z

targets and low energy betas with medium Z

targets. This rule is, however, limited in ap-

plicability to the design of compact isotopic

sources. _.v'T'nena large size X-cay source can be tolerated, there exists more flexibility in fl-

emitter-target

combination.

For example, a

substantial improvement in peak purity can be

obtained if a loose geometric configuration, such

as the 90 ░ reflection target, can be used.

Strontium-90

Source Design

As discussed above, we considered the Sr 9░

a very suitable fl-emitter for an isotopic X-ray

source using high Z target material in a sand-

wich geometry.

Treating the specific case of an

X-ray spectrum peaking at about 100 keV

(uranium target), an optimum thickness of 230

mg/cm -2 results. A Sr 9░ source material

very suitable for this

type of X-ray source design seems to be the

SrTiOa manufactured

in the form of very

stable ceramic pellets by ORNL. For a flsource thickness equivalent to two relaxation

lengths (-_300 mg cm --_) and with the specific activity of 40 Ci per gram of ceramic compound,

the "effective" fl-activity is about ;12 Ci per

square centimeter of source area. The K X-ray output, evaluated

for to, t=230

mg/cm -2 and a fl-activity of 12 Ci per square

centinleter, turns out to be 10 TM photons/see per

square centimeter of source area, or about 25

"mCi" of K photons per curie of the fl-emitter. At one foot distance from a source of area 1 cm -_,

the flux of K X-rays is about 10 c K photons/see -_

cm -_ ; and the dose rate is about 200 mr/hr.

The spectral distribution

of X-rays from a

Sr 9░ source with a uranium target is quite sim-

ilar to that obtained with a lead target. The

energy distribution of X-rays exhibits a K peak

of high purity, with a ratio of about 1 : 1 for the

132

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

8

.

K peak and the bremsstrahlung tail components. This spectral distribution and X-ray flux that can be obtained suggested that this source should be particularly suited to thickness gauging, industrial radiography, and composition analysis by backscattering technique. Its performance is expected to be quite similar to that of the 129-day -,+emitter TmI7O, with the advantage of a much longer half-life. The cost of the X-ray output from the SrQOand high 2 targets is moderate, of the order of one dollar or less per millicurie of K photons.

Promethium 147 Source Design

The most efficient geometry for PmI4' is the source-target mixture where the full energy of

FIGURE1.-PmI47 source holder.

the betas is dissipated in the target material. Maximum X-ray output from Pm147can, of course, be obtained when the &emitter is not mixed with a target compound and the characteristic X-rays are produced in the promethium itself.
For Prnl4', the analytically calculated value of the photon production function in the energy range from 30 to 50 keV about the 38.5 keV K X-ray of promethium is:

sisted of 250 curies of Pmlr7; this is approximately 366 mg of Pm2O3. The oxide was compressed and sintered into a pellet approximately 7 mm in diameter by 2 mm thick. The pellet was then encapsulated in an aluminum` container %-inch in diameter by ?&inch long, with a 15 millimeter aluminum end window. The source was then placed in a stainless steel and hevimet housing with a movable shutter, figure 1. This provides the necessary shield-

Nb,= 1.6X photon/B N k s =1.0X10-3 photon/b

ing for ease of handling and allows controlled exposures.
The spectrum obtained has a pronounced

GNo,=O-2.9X

photon/@

(depending on source geometry).

peak in the region about 40 keV, due primarily to the K X-rays of promethium.
The spectral measurements show that the

Assuming a value for GNb, intermediate between its maximum and minimum contribution, the total production function, N ( W ) , for a promethium source should be approximately 4X photons/p. The X-ray output from such a source will be given, therefore, by

flux of photons with energy around 40 keV is
5.5 X lo5 photons/cm2/sec a t one foot from the
source, compared to the calculated flux of
8 X lo5 photons/cm2/sec a t one foot. Since the
15 millimeter aluminum window absorbs
-5.5% and since -10% of the K-shell
vacancies result in emission of Auger electrons

AaN(W)
PZ

photon/sec

and not K X-rays, the calculated flux is reduced to 7 x 1 0 ~photon/cm2/sec a t one foot. There

,

where A is the activity per gram, a is the source area in square centimeters, pz is the K X-ray

is, therefore, fair agreement between the actual and theoretical X-ray yield. The total flux of

absorption coefficient in promethium (pz= 4.66 cm2/g a t 40 keV), and t is the source

photons of all energies as calculated from the
spectral data is ~8 X lo5photon/cm2/sec at one

thickness in grams per square centimeter.

foot. The cost of the Pm147used for the proto-

The prototype source of this geometry con- type source was $12.00 per curie.

.

DESIGN AND APPLICATIONS OF #-EXCITED X-RAY SOURCES

133

UTILIZATION

OF THE PROTOTYPE

SOURCES IN TYPICAL APPLICATIONS

The performance of the isotopic sources discussed in the previous sections has been investigated in some typical applications. The applications which are useful in connection with bone densitometry are mass thickness gauging by X-ray attenuation and radiographic inor_pection.
For mass thickness of gauging, an important parameter is the spectral distribution of the X-rays since it determines both the total attenuation and the rate of change of attenuation with thickness. The statistical fluctuations depend on the former and the sensitivity on the latter. If the ideal conditions of exponential absorption are obtained, the optimum choice of X-ray energy is that for which the absorption coefficient is twice the reciprocal of the thickheSS to be measured. As an example, assuming bone to be pure calcium phosphate of density 3 gm/cm s, the optimum energy for a 1-cm thickness is 47 keV. True exponential absorption is not realized in most practical situations; however, one can usually adjust the X-ray flux and the peak energy until the optimum combination of sensitivity and statistical fluctuation is achieved, fl-excited sources represent a particularly attractive solution to these adjustment problems since their X-ray energy distribution can be varied according to the choice of target material and thickness.
Results of studies of mass thickness gauging which are applicable to medical technology are those made for lucite and aluminum since the
average atomic numbers of tissue and bone, respectively, are similar. For aluminum (and thus for bone,) the promethium source gives the highest readability (which is defined as the ratio betwen the sensitivity and the statistical fluctuation). For lucite (and tissue) the use of a target of lower atomic number such as zirconium gives the highest readability.
In applications to a two-component system where attenuation measurements are made at
two different X-ray energies one has to be very careful to insure that any pair of measured

attenuations always indicate unambiguously a pair of thickness values for the two components, regardless of the arrangement of the components in the system. This is best accomplished by making the sources as monoenergetic as possible and by reducing the scattering to negligible amounts. At last October's Symposium on Low Energy X and Gamma Sources and Their Applications, Sorenson and Cameron
for a system in which the two components were fat and muscle. They used Am _4_(60 keV) and well-filtered I _25 (27 keV) as the two source_ They have extended this technique using the same sources to the bone-muscle system as reported earlier in today's symposium.
Also at last October's symposium, Goodman and Levin reported the development of a similar technique for measurements on the bone-muscle system in which were used fluorescent X-ray sources stimulated by a fl-excited X-ray source. Dr. Levin, who is Chief Radiologist at Michael Reese Hospital, was unable to attend today's symposium because of previous commitments. The B-excited X-ray source he used was the 250 Ci Pm _v source. The strong peak at 38 keV is excellent for producing the 32 keV barium K X-ray in a disc of barium sulphate, and the continuum above 78 keV is fine for producing the 66 keV X-ray from a platinum foil. This technique measures bone mineral content in the lower arm with a reproducibility of 2% or better. Thus, changes in bone mineral content can easily be followed by this technique during the course of a disease or other processes causing osteoporosis. This technique has the advantages that the X-ray energies can be varied to give optimum combination of sensitivity and statistical fluctuation. The choice of barium and
platinum by Goodman and Levin was not such an optimum choice but was dictated by the availability of the promethium source. For example, a fl-excited source, using promethium betas to excite a uranium target, gave a spectrum with two peaks at 15 keV and 97 keV which can be used to stimulate monoenergetic K X-ray
lines from a bromide compound (12 keV) and a bismuth foil (75 keV), respectively.

134

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

*.

For radiographic inspection applications, the promethium source was tested since its parameters were cliosen to give as high an intensity as possible from an approximab point source.
As examples of medical radiography, several exposures were taken using the Pm147source and Kodak Royal Blue Medical X-ray film with Patterson Lightning Special Intensifying screens. This film-screen combination has a fast response to the low energy X-rays and thereby minimizes exposure times. T o provide a comparison, figure 2 shows an exposure of a human skeletal hand made with a conventional hospital X-ray machine. This exposure has good diagnostic value because the definition

FIGUBE2.-Radiograph of skeletal hand, using conventional X-ray niachine and film.

FIGUR3E.-Radiograph of skeleton hand, using Pm*" X-ray source and Kodak Royal Blue medical film with Patterson Lightning Special intensifying screen : 30-second exposure, 12-inch source to film distance.
and contrast of the bone fine structure is very good. An exposure of the same skeletal hand using the Pm147p-excited X-ray source is shown in figure 3. The source to film distance was 12 inches, with the object placed on the film cassette, and the exposure time was 30 seconds. The bone fine structure is visible but does not have the sharpness as in the previous figure. This is probably due to penumbra effects caused by the 7-mm source size and to the graininess of the fast speed film-intensifier combination used. A similar exposure made wth a 24-inch source to film distance and a 140-secondexposure time improved the quality of the fine structure only very slightly and does not appear to justify the increase of exposure time.
It may be possible to perform radiographic bone densitometry measurements with this source and film system in situations which exclude a conventional X-ray machine. We urge that radiographs using this source be evaluated for this application.
A Polaroid X-ray film unit coupled with an isotopic X-ray source represents a completely portable X-ray system. Several medical radio-
graphs were made to evaluate the results of

DESIGN

AND

APPLICATIONS

OF fl-EXCITED

X-RAY

_OURCF_

135

4O SiC

9

iN

FIGUR_ 4.--Radiograph

X-ray

_ource

with

9-inch source to

of human

polaroid

film

film distance.

hand, : 40-second

using

Pm :'_

exposure,

this system. Figure 4 shows one of these radio-
graphs. Since some of the methods of bone densitometry require measurements of bone dimensions, it seems that a fl-excited X-ray source would be able to provide these dimensions in situations which exclude a conventional X-ray macl_ne.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Our investigations indicate that fl-excited X-ray sources are extremely useful as complementary devices to the presently existing macl_nes. The small size and portability of these isotopic sources make them very attractive for field uses and for nondestructive testing problems both in industry and in mexiicine when the situation bruits the u_ of conventiona!
X-ray machines. The relative monochromatic output of such sources is another advantageous feature. The only limitations of fl-excited X-ray sources are centered around the limited photon outputs per unit source area.
Approximate formulae for the design and optimization of these sources have been derived, tested, and found satisfactory.
Transmiasion measurements of bone mineral
content using a fl-excited X-ray source show great promise, since monoenergetic fluorescence K X-rays can be used from almost any element. The technique of Goodman and Levin can be further developed to increase the sensitivity and tho statistical accuracy.
The use of radiographs taken with fl-excited X-ray sources for measurements of bone dimensions is also a possibility.

REFERENCES

BURHOP, H. L. : Proc. Camb. PhiL Soc., 36, 43,1940.

EVANS, R. D. : The Atomic Nucleus, McGraw Hill, 1955.

FILOSOFO, I. : "Isotopic Sources of Secondary Radiation," ARF 1122-27, Armour Research

Foundation, Chicago, Ill., February 1, 1961.

FILOSOFO, I. ; RE_FF_L, L. ; STONE, C. A. ; and VoYVODIC, L. : "Design and Characteristics

of

Beta-Excited

X-Ray Source," Radioisotopes in the Physical Sciences and Industry,

International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 1962.

GOODMAn, L. ; LEvrN, B. : "In-Vivo Measurement of Bone Material Content by Transmis-

sion Techniques," paper presented at the Symposium on Low Energy X and Gamma

Sources and Applications at IIT Research Institute, Chicago, Ill., October 20-21, 1964,

proceedings to be published by the AEC.

HErrLER, W. : The Quantum Theory of Radiation, Oxford University Press, 1944.

REIFFEL, L. : Nucleonics 13, No. 3, 22, 1955.

REIFFEL, I_, and HUMPHREYS, R. F. : Proc. InL Conf., Geneva, vol. 15, 291, 1956.

REIFFEL, L. : U.S. Patent 2,797,333 "X-Ray Source," June 25, 1957.

Rm_FEL, L. : U.S. Patent 2,928,944 "Apparatus for X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis," March 15,

1960.

136

BDEVEL_PMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

SORENSON,

_'. A. ; and CAMERON,

Absorption

of Monochromatic

J. R. : "Body Composition

Determination

by Differential

X-Rays,"

paper presented

at the Symposium

on Low

Energy X and Gamma Sources and Applications

at IIT Research

Institute,

Chicago,

Ill., October 20-21, 1964, proceedings

to be published

STARFELT,

N. ; CF_EaLUND, J., and LIDEN, K. : Jr. Appl.

by the AEC. Rad. and Isotopes,

vol. 2, 265, 1957.

COMMENTS

Dr. RICH. You seemed to indicate that Goodman and

Levin spin a source so that they get two different beams

alternating.

Did I misunderstand

that point?

Dr.

STINCHCOMB.

way with a plot

They number.

have Then

to take a traverse

one

they switch it 180 ░ and

take a traverse the other way.

Dr. RIOH. What particular

advantage

does use of

two energies give?

Dr. STINCHCOMR.

Goodman

and Levin used 67 and

38 because our promethium

source was available

to

them. Our promethium

source, as you remember

from

the spectrum, had a big peak at about 40, so that it was

just right for exciting the K spectrum,

while radiation

in the tail above 67 keV was high enough to excite the

high energy one. So'meone can go through

all these

equations

and find out exactly what the best energies

to use might be. Perhaps

you have done that and

found that Iodine and Americium

satisfied exactly.

Dr. CAMERON. I would like to make a comment

in

answer to Dr. Rich's question.

It is obvious that you

can get measurements

with only one wavelength

as Dr.

Strandjord advantage

and Dr. Lanzl and we have done. The one

of having the two wavelengths

is that the

thickness

of the material

you are measuring

can be

cancelled

out. It enters in as a common element and

you can essentially

get rid of the thickness.

This is

not a serious problem.

I do not personally

think it is

worthwhile

having two wavelengths

just to get rid of

a relatively

simple physical

measurement.

In answer to the other question,

though, about the

optimum

energies,

this is not easy to answer

in one

sentence

because it depends

on the thickness

of the

material

you are measuring.

For example,

on the

thigh to go through

a large amount of material,

you

have to use a higher energy in order to have statistical

information

left on the output beam. If you are going

through very thin bone, you might do something

on the

order of 20 keV, thin beams ; Cd lo9 would be a good one

and we hope to investigate will do it.

it. In general, any energy

Dr.

STINCI-ICOMR.

YOU can get any energy you want

because you can make this source peak at any part of

the spectrum.

If you are not satisfied with the sharp-

ness, then you can use this technique

to sharpen it up

further

and again you can choose whatever

you want.

Theoretically,

one could extend this to two, three,

or as many as you want, and go into calcium and phos-

phorus content.

Whether

you can get any kind of ac-

curacy with multieomponent

systems

is something

I

certainly

am not prepared

to say.

Dr. CAMEaON. I want to throw some cold water on it.

I think it is very possible in theory. Dr. STINCttCOMR. That is all we are saying.

Dr. CAMERON. There are a lot of things

sible in theory.

When you get beyond

wavelengths,

you have to spread them

that are postwo different a long way.

Putting

other wavelengths

in between is going to be of

very marginal

value.

Dr. STINCHCOMB. If yOU took the one that had a

uranium

K peak and put in fluorescence,

then you

could get a two-component

system that could be quite

widely separated. in bone densitometry.

I leave it to you if this is applicable

Dr. MALETSKOS. have been talking

As I indicated

in the beginning,

we

about one physical

characteristic,

namely,

transmission

of electromagnetic

radiation

through material.

There are many other physical prin-

ciples that one can apply to the problem.

Another is

going to be described

in the paper to be presented

now.

Sonic Measurement of Bone Mass*

CI_Y'roN RICH, EL: KLINK, RAY S:m-rH,
Radioisotope Service, Veterans Administration Hospital and Departments of Medicine and Radiology, University of Washington School of Medicine

Velocity of sound varies according to the density and elastic properties (for solids) or compressibility (for liquids and gasses) of the medium through which it passes, and is greater in solid than in liquid media (Carlin, 1960). Thus, when a pulse of sound is passed through a limb which contains bone and soft issues, such as muscle, the velocity will be greater in the bone than in the soft tissues and the time necessary for sound to traverse the limb will depend upon the distance of the sonic path in each tissue. If the velocities in soft tissue are similar and sufficiently different from that in bone, and when the total distance is constant, the transit time can be used to measure the amount of bone present. Potentially, the same principle can be used to measure the proportion of any two _bstances (muscle and bone, liver and fat, or muscle and air) through which the sound passes, irrespective of their geometric configuration.
We have previously reported briefly on application of this principle to measure bone mass (Rich et al., 1963). In this paper we will describe the instrument by which these measurements are made and give results which point to a general applicability of this method.
* These studies were supported in part by a grant from The U.S. Public Health Service (A-4701). Dr. Graham was a recipient of an Advanced Fellowship in Academic Radiology of the flames Picker Foundation during part of the period of this work.

METHOD
Professor Rushmer's group at the University of Washington have developed an instrument, the "sonodistometer," which measures the time between transmission and reception when a burst of sound is passed between two piezoelectric crystal transducers (Rushmer et al., 1965; Mullins, 1961). The transducers are fixed to structures such as the walls of a blood vessel or the heart, and the record of changes in transit time is used to measure the fluctuation in distance between these walls.
In our method for measuring bone mass, the sonodistometer is modified to measure velocity of sound in any given medium. To do this the distance between the transducers is kept constant. Therefore, the transit time is reciprocally proportional to the velocity of sound in the medium separating them. The elements of this instrument are shown in figure 1. Two piezeolectric ceramic transducers are fixed rigidly to opposing ends of a U-shaped frame. One transmits a burst of sound which passes through the medium between them and is received by the other. In order to prevent the very substantial absorption of sound by air, the transducers and any substance to be examined are immersed in a tank of water. The trans-
ducers are of barium titinate and are shaped so that their natural thickness mode of vibration is
3 megacycles. This high frequency is used to achieve a narrow, well-defined beam so that
137

138

DEyE_0PMENT

OF METttODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

good resolution of structures examined is obtained.

within the tissues

Convertor Section

To produce a sonic vibration in the water,

900-volt pulse is fed through a pulse trans-

former to give it the rise time characteristic

of

the 3-megacycle sinusoidal frequency.

This is

Ę,,

_Ę

II

,'_

/i

i"

II

Ę s, I

II

recording system

applied to the transducer to generate an abrupt

train of sinusoidal oscillations.

The train is

dampened so that the total duration of the sonic

burst is about 15 gsee. The transmitter

is so

pulsed 60 times a second; but as the duration of

each burst of sound is short, the amount of

energy which could be transmitted

to a living

tissue is small--less than 9 cal per minute even

if entirely absorbed.

The converter section, which has been modi-

fied from that of Mullins (1961), is shown by

figure 2. A voltage ramp is started at the time

the transmitter transducer is pulsed and cut off

by the signal from the reeei'ver transducer.

The properties of this voltage ramp are such

that the voltage rises at a constant rate during

the time between these two signals. Therefore,

the maximum voltage attained is directly pro-

portional to the time between transmission and

reception of the pulse. The voltage is stored on

a capacitor until the next time the transmitter

fires; then the storage capacitor is discharged

and a new charge is stored on it by the ramp.

The discharged voltage is amplified and fed to

a recording system which produces a line that

varies position with the intensity of the stored

voltage. The results are displayed on an oscil-

loscope and by a rectilinear recorder.

ITrons- L--.

_tter ._

I1

]. t Osc_i/l:e]

Converter

_

Section

FIGVRP. 2.--The

conversion

tometer and adapted

system used in the sonodisfor sonic velocimetry.

There were several problems which had to be

solved before the sonodistometer

could be used

for the measurements

described herein.

to handle a large common mode signal

trostatic origin from the transmitter

First, of elec-
trans-

ducer, a balanced input was employed.

This,

together with techniques of containing the elec-

tric field in the transmitter

crystal, kept the

electrostatic coupling effect within usable lim-

its. Second, the output from the receiver crys-

tal varied because of large losses from reflec-

tion when the sound beam was passed through irregularly structured material such as trabecu-

lar bone. The transmitted signal was 900 volts. When only water was between the transducers, the output from the receiver crystal was usually about 10 volts; but when trabecular bone was interposed, it fell to 100 _V, and sometimes

less. Accordingly,

it was necessary to use an

automatic gain control circuit which variably

amplified the signal from the receiver trans-

ducer, to achieve approximately

the same am-

plified signal strength,

irrespecti've

of the

voltage input. }Vhile no amplification was nec-

essary for a strong signal, a weak sigual might be amplified as much as 10,000 times. The limiting factors are inherent in the amplifiers

themselves, and it is a fact that with higher
amplification the signal becomes indistinguishable from noise.

This system, which we call the sonic veloci-
l'ec░r e'lmeter, allows measurement of changes in transit time when the signal is passed through a given medium. If the distance between the trans-

FIGURE 1.--Block

diagram

of the sonic velocimeter.

ducers has been measured, the volocity of

SONIC MEASUREMENT

OF BONE MASS

139

soundin anyhomogenoutissuecanbecalcuted. of the radioactivity under the detector. The In practice,the distancebetweenthe trans- scanning sonic velocimeter is shown in scheducersis calculatedfrom a measuremeonft the matic form in figure 3. The frame which holds

transit time of a sonicpulsepassedthrougha the transducers is fixed to the detector of a com-

referencme ediumin whichthevelocityof sound is known.
Slicesof bovinecorticalor trabecularbone werecutandpolishedto form rectangles.The dimensionsof thesesegmentsof bone were

mercially obtained clinical radioisotope

scan-

ning device, as shown at the upper left. The

crystal transducers, the sample, and a standard

are placed in a tank of water in such a way that they are scanned as the frame is moved back and

measuredby a micrometert,he bonesweighed forth, as shown at the upper right. An idealand finally (after sonicmeasuremenwtsere ized recording from this path onto a strip chart finished)ashedin nitric acidandthe calcium is shown at the bottom. This indicates a "base

contentdeterminedby titration with versine line" transmission time when the signal passes (Jonesand _fcGuskin,1964). Other tissues through water alone (a), and a change when it

weremeasureadfterbeingpackedlightly intoa 1-cmlucitecellwhichcontainedthetransducers in its walls.
To measurechangeosf transmissiontime in

passes through the standard bone wedge (b).

As the sonic path traver_s the sample, there is

a change in transmission

time indicating soft

tissue (c), and an additional change when it

nonhomogenousstructuredtissue,the sensing passes through soft tissue and bone (d). The devicewaspassedbackandforth at a constant difference between transmission time through

rateoverthe tissuein a regulargeometricpat- bone and soft tissues and that through soft tis-

tern, and a continuous record of signal trans-

sues alone can be compared to the transmission

mission time was made by appropriate record-

ing apparatus.

This technique is analogous to

through a bone chip of known composition. This allows estimation of the mass of calcium in

that used in radioisotope

scanning, where a the bone examined.

When the dimensions of

radiation detector is passed back and forth across the region over-lying a radioisotope ac-

the bone are known (from an X-ray), ity can be estimated.

its dens-

cumulating organ, and a graphic record is made

CALCULATIONS

,

I

_- _

,.__._J

21.05t
o.I j o

d
---t__

_-->

_o_.

3.--Diagram

of the operation

sonic velocimeter.

7_55

O---66--10

of the scanning

It is assumed that the distance between the

transducers is fixed, that the velocity of sound

in any given medium is constant, that the

voltage output is directly proportional

to the

transit time, and that, when a scan is made, both the transducer frame and chart recorder move

at constant rates. Then, when a single medium separates the transducers, d= t/c, where d-- cm, t----/_sec, and c--- cm per _sec. When the velocity is known (reference medium in this work is

water at 20░C; c=0.143), this can be used to de-

termine d. Thereafter,

with d known,

other media can be determined.

c of

When several media are placed between the

transducers,

t=dlcl + d2c2 ...

+d,c,, where

dw_ represent the distance of the sonic path and

velocity in the ita medium and dl+d2 Ę . .

+d,=d.

This relationship can be used to cal-

culate c_ or d_ if the other factors are known.

140

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

If, in the passage of the sonic pulse through a limb immersed in water, tl is time through

water, Q through skin, t3 through muscle, t4

through other soft tissues, and t5 through bone,

the total time through a part of the limb imme-

diately adjacent to the bone= t' = tl + t2 + t3 + t_,

and that through bone= t' = ts. If the distances

d_, d_, d3, and d_ have not changed significantly

between the two measurements, the difference in

total time measured is ts. If the velocity of

sound in bone is c5 and has been independently

determined, d5 can be calculated.

In theory,

this gives the thickness of bone in the sonic path,

independent of its shape or state of dispersion

(cortical or trabecular).

This value can be

converted to the mass of bone or calcium in a

column of unit area in the path of the sonic

beam.

The sonic scan theoretically

gives the same

information for any linear trace over the limb.

The height of the sonic scan is proportional to t

and the breadth proportional to the distance the

transducers have moved. These together de-

scribe an area on tbe paper. When A8 and A,

are the areas so produced for a standard and an

unknown, and M8 and M, are the amounts of

calcium per square centimeter sonic path, M.=A,, Ms/A_.

normal to the

Q
70o-
r,o q._
1600-

1500- I_

I

I

I

I

I

0

5

10

15 20

25

gmper IOOml

FIGURE 4.--Velocity of sound in solutions of different concentrations of NaC1 and CaC12.

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

1540 _ 1550-

Ę gelotin o plosmo protein

1520_ 1510-

Ż500-

1490-

I

gm. per lOOml.

FZOURE 5.--Velocity

of sound in different

concentra-

tions of gelatin and plasma proteins.

RESULTS

We found the velocity of sound in beef bone,

muscle, and fat to be 2880, 1630, and 1540 M per

second, respectively.

The measurements

were

made at 90 ░ C and are based upon the assumed

velocity of sound in pure water of 1430 M per

second (Carlin, 1960). There is variation

when such nonhomogenous

substances

as

muscle, fat, and cancellous bone are measured,

as would be expected because of the lack of

uniformity of the tissues examined.

The veloc-

ity in fatty tissue is greater than that found in

pure fat (1460 M per sec), but this is not sur-

prising, as the tissue contains cell protoplasm

as well as fat. It is presumably because of the

fat that velocity of sound in fat tissue is less than in muscle.

Figures 4, 5, and 6 show the velocity changes

in different concentrations

of salt and protein

and different mixtures of blood cells and saline.

The relationship between protein concentration

and velocity was nonlinear at the higher concentrations as could be expected, because veloc-

ity is a power function of compressibility

and

density in liquid media. A linear relationship

is found when sound is passed through differing

concentrations

of erythrocytes;

as in this case,

the concentration

of protein within the cellular

Ę"

so_c _ASlYaZ_E_Vr OF SOU _

141

phase is not changed, only the fraction of the

medium occupied by cells. The changes in

velocity appear to be accounted tein in the red cells.

for by the pro-

Figure 7 shows the difference between transit

time when the fixed transducers

are immersed

in water alone and when chips of compact bovine or trabecular bone of different thicknesses

are interposed between them. On the abscissa

is plotted milligrams

of calcium per square

centimeter normal to the sonic path, and on the ordinate is the measured decrease in transit

time. For cortical bone there was a high correlation between change in transit time and either length of the sonic path through bone or, as plotted in figure 7, mass of calcium in the

sonic path. There was a slightly better correla-

tion between transit time and mass, rather than

di_ance, as might, be expected because of the

variability in calcification of different samples

of cortical bone. The coefficient of variation

for the entire set of measurements

on cortical

bone was 5%. The same accuracy
trabecular bone are

is not seen when chips of

examined.

These repre-

-2.0

..f

A

/

t

A

/

-1.6

-1.2
-.8

/ o/g /

/

_t

A

//Q

/

,t

/

-.4

/ m

// / / /
ó
50

100

1.50

200

250

mg calcium per cm 2

l_Gv_z 7.--Decrease

in transit time from that in water

alone when sound is passed through different thick-

nesses of bone. On the ordinate is the change in

transit time (#see) and on the abscissa the mass of

calcium through which the sound passes (nag Ca per

cm 2 normal for cortical

to the sonic path). bone and triangles

Circles give values those for trabecular

bone. Closed circles are measurements

made on an

early instrument

2 years before those represented

by

the open figures.

.1.620-
1600-
J.580-
-,
1560-

/
/
/
/

E] muscle

:_ 15401520-

15oo-

2b 4'0 do 80 Ioo
Percent RBC in saline

/_Gvmz 6.wVelocity

of sound in different mixtures

of

human erythrocytes

and 0.9% NaC1. Also shown is

the velocity

of sound

(bovine muscle).

in a fully

cetlular

tissue

sent a much more technically difficult measurement because of loss of a large part of the sonic energy, presumably from reflection and formation of shear waves as the beam is passed

through the many interphases between marrow. However, even when these difficulties are overcome, the resulting

bone and technical measure-

ment fails to predict accurately the calcium content. As indicated in figure 7, the sonic measurement gives a value which usually results in too high a prediction of the mass of calcium present. The possible reasons for this will be commented upon later.

In order to determine the accuracy with which the sonic scanning velocimeter can be used to predict the mass of bone present within an intact limb, a rabbit femur was scanned 0.5 cm from its proximal end and each centimeter below

this point for 7 cm. A typical result (aŻ 2.5 cm from the proximal end) is shown in figure 8.

The area due to bone could easily be identified

142

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN" BONE DEN"S.ITOMETRY

6

Ę

;:

::]

!!

TABLE I.--Ultrasonic

and Chemical Measure-"

ments on a Rabbit Femur

Position of scan (era Irom head)

Area of bone profile in sonic

scan

(enl2)

Intact limb

Bone only

[
Mg calcium per em segment of bone

Predicted from scan

Found

Differ-
eiloe

; ; V_-IP-
_-_'7
I!!!!_
!!!!!!
IIllll
!!!!!!
ii iii i
Ilill0
_i i i i i

FIGURE 8.--Sonic

scan of a rabbit thigh.

in all the scans, but the two most proximal were very irregular because of reflections from the different joint surfaces and could not be used. The soft, tissues were then removed and the femur a_'ain scanned at the same point. The areas due to bone of all but the two proximal scans were deterlnined by planimetry and are given in table I. A rec.tangle of bovine cortical bone, which served as a standard, was carried through these same steps and its known calcium content used to calculate the mass of calcium present in the path of the sonic scans. The rabbit femur was then divided into l-era segments, ashed, and the amount of calcium measured as also shown in table I. There was no

significant differeuee between the area of scans

of the intact and stripped bone, the small

changes observed being accounted for by the

improbability

that the two scans were exactly

in the same place. The standard deviation of

the difference between predicted and found

values was 6.6 mg calcium, and the coefficient of

variation, 4.2%.

Figure 9 shows the scan of a stripped bovine fenmr. It is easy to identify in this and in

2.5

......

3.5 ......

4.5 ......

5.5 ......

6.5 ......

7.5 ......

26. 8 26. 5

174

26. 8 27. 5

181

28. 5 26. 5

174

24. 5 24. 0

158

23. 0 22. 0

149

18. 0

118

Standard (bovine cortex) .......

39. 5 ......

187

13

177

--4

187

13

169

11

143

--2

125

7

260

figure 8 the part of the scan which results from the passage of the transducers over the middle part of the bone where the beam passes perpendicularly through the cortex, as compared tq the lateral part of the scan, where it passes tangentially through a greater distance of bone.

DISCUSSION

Several applications of ultrasound to measurement of tissue structure in situ have been

made. Most work has been based upon reception of a reflection of sound from some inter-

phase within the tissue examined.

Some early

work was based upon absorption of sound in

tissues (Carlin, 1960; Newell, 1963), and a few

measurements

of transit time through tissue

have been made (Ludwig, 1950); but these

latter methods proved technically difficult and

were abandoned.

We have taken advantage

of regent technological made the transmission

developments measurement

which more

feasible.

This system shows promise of accurate meas-

urement of the mass of the tubular portions of

the bones of the limbs, and can probably be

used also to determine some properties of the

soft tissues. Although this may result in some

worthwhile applications, sirable if measurements

it would be very deof the mass of trabec-

SONIC MEASUREMENT

=n Is,_ul I I I I I I I I

II I I

I ii i l _ _i i'L4L I-! I it

I k'.I I I ! tJll I I_dl T"ll t I I i _ i

i P'_I ! I i !!

i!I i

Illll

It t !1 I I tl I I t i"

f !1 il ii-'

i t IIJTI

i_

P ti FJ I

I i I| | I If Ii: i

ii kll I I 1I1I[ !! iI I !I iI III! II I !I Ii J

+Ill IIII It Ji !t fill i Ill

I i Ill!

_ t [ I ill

II IIf

IJll

I I I +1

I !1 II I t

Lll

HI I i_i

I I Ill

ltl

iE

i tt I

il,tlll

t

I

t t III

IIIItli

/+

III

I

L I III

I

! I t! ii !_
'

il I , i i ii ti

Illl

III

' 1liFt

1 '_-

III

I'

IIlllllllll tll

II I

Ill

lllll

Ill

:;

i"+'"'" illii I l Ill 1 I

!II '

I

!

i

t I I + i I II

I _i

Ill I i I i 11 i I III II IIi

r:![117,11 i I! _F_

/ t_ ; _ ! I i I !l,I I I | t f t !

ii It
'i tl

iI tl' : ill

] It| III I

.!

I I i _, I ] _|l

I '''

i
I!11111 _ '+' 7ii i il I : :

J

IIi IJII

lit

, Ill ii It I I i I

Tll

l

rlI IIiill

l]i

''

FmU_E

9.--Scan

of a beef femur from which

tissues had been removed.

the soft

ular bone could be carried out as well. Sev-
eral factors which may significantly influence this measurement are now being evaluated. There is much greater absorption of sound in trabecular bone than in other tissues, presumably largely because of reflections of sound as
it passes through the many irregularly arranged interphases. This can possibly be overcome by increasing the signal strength, by reducing the noise (and thereby allowing more amplification of the current from the receiver transducer), or by altering the frequency.: We hay- used a high frequency to obtain a narrow beam, but this can be achieved by other means, and sound of a lower frequency is not so greatly absorbed (Carlin, 1960).
The other difficulty is that, in an irregularly dispersed system such as trabecular bone, some portion of the sound may pass through a particularly dense portion of bone and thus arrive sooner at the receiver transducer than it would have otherwise. This would cut off the voltage ramp early and the velocimeter would indicate
a greater amount of bone than was present on the average in the path of the sonic beam.

OF BONE MASS

143

When the cross section of the beam is relatively large compared to the condensations of bone over which the transducers pass (as is the case for trabecular bone), this effect could cause the
sonic scan to indicate more bone than was present. Attempts are now in progress to reduce this difficulty through use of transducers specially shaped to give an intense beam of only a few millimeters in diameter.
A theoretically more difficult problem is illustrated by figure 10. The sound beam need not go in a straight line through bone, as shown to the left. Instead, it may take a circuitous course in a trabecular system, as shown on the right, so that it passes through solid bone for a greater portion of its transit than it would if it went in a straight line. This would result in the sonic scan giving too high an estimate of the mass of trabecular bone. Further work will be required to determine whether one or both of these factors, or others not yet identified, are the cause of the inaccurate measurements of trabecular bone mass.
The potential advantages of this system are its precision, safety, speed of operation, and, in respect to cortical bone, its accuracy. At present, we can scan the human forearm, wrist, and fingers and presume that the same could be done for some bones of the leg. The inability to accurately estimate the amount of calcium
in trabecular bone and the fact that absorption
of power may be too great if the beam is passed through a thick part of the body make it seem unlikely that the present instrument can be applied to measurement of vertebral mass.

i

i

FIGURE 10.---Comparison pulse through

of possible trabecular

paths of the sonic bone.

144

DEVELOPMENT
REFERENCES

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

CARLIN,

B. : Ultrasonics.

Second ed. McGraw-Hill

Book Co., New York,

JONES, J. D. ; and MCGUSKIN, W. F. : Complexometric

Titration

of Calcium

by a Semiautomated

Procedure.

Clin. Chem. vol. 10, 1964, p. 767.

1960. and Magnesium

Luvwio,

G. D. : The Velocity

of Sound through

Tissues

and the Acoustic

Impedance

in

Tissues.

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 22, 1950, p. 862.

MULLXNS, G. L. : Sonodistometer.

Digest

Electronics,

New York, 1961, p. 70.

of the 4th International

Conference

on Medical

NEWZLL, J. A. : Ultrason{cs

in medicine.

Phys. Meal. Biol., vol. 8, 1963, p. 241.

RICH, C. ; KLINK, E. J. ; MULLIN.S, G. L. ; and GRAHAM, C. B. : Sonic Measurement Mass. J. Clin. Invest., vol. 42, 1963, p. 970.

of Bone

RUSHMER, R. F. ; FRANKLIN, D. E. ; and ELLIS, R. E. : Left Ventricular

Dimensions

Re-

corded by Sonocardiometry.

Circ. Res., vol. 4, 1956, p. 684.

COMMENTS

Dr. MALETSKOS. What size area of bone did you use?

Dr. RICH. Two or 3 cm x 1 or 2 cm were used.

Dr. MALETSK0S. I was trying to get the relationship

between the area of crystal and the area of the bone.

Dr. RICH. The crystal is only 0.5 cm in diameter

or

less. This can be varied.

As I will explain later, we

would like to have a point source, but we must get

some power out of the thing.

This is a problem that

we are embroiled

with right now.

Dr. URIST. Was that calcium hydroxyapatite,

bone

ash, or bone? Dr. RICH. It was bone.

These are carefully

milled

rectangles replotted

of cortical bone. (fig. 7) and these

These obscure

are the same data open circles are a

set of new deterlninations

done 2Į years later with

an entirely bone.

different

machine

and different

chips of

What this shows is that the velocity of sound has

not changed in the last 2 years in bovine bone, not

too striking

a discovery.

This entire set of data

simply indicates If you divide

something

about our present precision.

one of these by the other you come up

with a figure of 0.131___0.0066, which gives a coefficient

of variation

of 5%. This is not by any means the

result of much instrumentation

effort at precision.

The factors

in

that we are now using could be con-

trolled further.

Dr. LANZL. Could you elaborate

on what A is?

Dr. RICH. A is the area of sonic profile in square

centimeters

of the bone, in this case the average

of

all segments.

Dr. LANZL. IS it the profile at the bone?

Dr. Rmm As the machine is passed over the bone,

we get an area in which the height is proportional,

we

trust, to the amount of calcium present.

The distance

is a function

of the length of the dimension

that we

scan, so that the area should be proportional

amount

of calcium

per unit area in the path

bone.

What I was trying to indicate was that the

to the of the
values

predict fairly well from one part to another of this

bone, one segment of which was trabecular.

I am not

quite sure why it was not off, but it was not. We can use, in this case and in others that we have done, the

scan of a standard bone chip to predict the amount of

calcium that we would have found.

In other words,

this is what one wishes to do in bone mass measure-

ment.

Dr. LANZL. Could you say anything

about the energy

cross section of your beam at the bone interface?

Dr. RICH. No, I really could not. We start out with

900 volts and end up in the beam with only 2 to 10

volts, depending

on the amount of soft tissue present.

It is quite variable.

We are really not dependent

on

the energy here so much as the velocity.

Dr. LANZL. I was trying to get at what was the

profile of the beam at the bone, the dispersion.

Dr. Rxcm We have measured

this only in water.

I

am sure it is altered

as it goes through

a complex

tissue.

The measurement

of it is rather complicated

;

and from our present point of view, since we are trying

to do away with this unevenness

in this profile, not

of first order of interest to us.

Dr. UR_ST. Would you say the more homogenous

the

solid phase, the more reproducible? Dr. RICH. Yes. _Ve do not have any trouble with

the homogeneous

solid phase.

The problem

is the

interface

in the trabecular

bone.

Dr. URXST. I assume you have run it down the long

axis.

Dr. Ricm Yes, we turn our cortical

bone at 90 ░.

Within

the precision

the difference.

There

of the machine

we cannot

see

is reason, since the elastic prop-

erties of the medium also affect the velocity, that you

SONIC MEASUREMENT

OF BONE MASS

145

might see the difference,

but I think you need greater

precision

than we have.

For example,

we just meas-

ure the bone within 0.1 ram. One centimeter

bone is

a fairly gross measurement

for the type of thing we

are getting at- Our present view is that this still

has a number of quite severe technical

problem_

Al-

though I realize that the data I showed had coeffi-

cients of variation

around 4 or 5%, these are due to

problems that one can't controL

I might say the speed of the scan, certainly

the

safety, and we believe the accuracy

in cortical

bone,

even when fairly deeply buried in soft tissues, is of a

rather encouraging

order.

I think it is too early to comment as to whether

trabecular

bone will yield to our efforts.

Our future

plans are to continue to attack some of these technical

details, end also to apply bones in the limb.

this to a study

of human

Dr. CAMERON. Have you used it on limbs yet?

Dr. RICH. Yes, we use it on our own limbs.

This

is an interesting

thing, because we have great trouble

with the little cube of bovine trabecular

bone when

we take it out and isolate it, but we can get through

the wrist.

We can scan right down the hand, yet I

don't understand

iL It may be that the sound is

passing along the cortical

envelope

and we are not

getting an accurate

measurement.

I don't know yet,

It is a preliminary

repor_

Dr.

NORDIN.

length from

purposes ?

Are you operating the one ordinarily

at a different

wave-

used for reflection

Dr. RICH. Yes, but this is 3 megacycles.

Dr. NORDIN. What is the normal figure?

Dr. CAMERON. I think it is about 1 megacycle. Dr. NCRDI_. These are used for sound for reflection?

Dr. RICH. For reflection,

yes.

Dr. NORVrN. Could you tell us what advantage

you

thought this would have over other forms of radiation

when you started and what your conclusion

is? I

mean relative

to X-radiation

does this compare?

and T-radiation.

How

Dr. RICH. Before we realized that we were really

in hot water with trabecular

bone, this method seemed

to me worthwhile

in that it offered a high degree of

precision, far higher than what the radiographic

tech-

niques in general were giving at that time. Now the

latter appear to have been improved, but all may have a limiting precision of about the same order.

We thought, since the principles of measurement

are

entirely different

different, there could be different applications, problems, perhaps different areas of optimal

use. To put it a little differently,

while exploring

new approaches.

usually it is worth-

Dr. NORDL_. Does not this trabecular

come down to a matter of frequency ?

some reflection,

aren't you?

bone perhaps You are getting

Dr. RICH. Reflection

is not too much of a problem.

The wavelength

of 3 megacycles

is probably in the

same general range of the dimension

of a trabecular

limb. There is theoretical

reason for believing

that

the lower frequency

probably will present other prob-

lems, while lessening

problems

with the graininess,

the reflection

in shear wave formation

in trabecular

bone. We might There is confusion

get other sources of loss of energy. when the frequency is too long.

This is definitely

one of the things that we are

investigating.

The speed of our investigation

somewhat

delayed because of instrumentation.

has been

Dr. COHEN. I am curious about the effect of geom-

etry on this transmission.

Suppose I had a cylinder

of cortical bone, and I measured

it one way along the

axis and then transversely.

Let us further say the

total dimension

stayed within the beam.

expect a difference in time of the leading

Would you edge arriv-

ing at your detector ?

Dr. RICH. Not theoretically.

My experience

with

this system has led me not to predict very much.

Dr. COHEN. If yOU have a fast velocity would get between points sooner.

path, you

Dr. RICH. There is no question about it.

Dr. COHEN. If it is a question

of the amount

of

bone measured

against a cube, there would be some

uncertainty.

Dr. RICH. I do not think there is any, with the

exception

of trabecular

bone.

ting a facilitated

path through

I think we may be get-

condensation

of trabecuo

lae. We always

measure

the moat

average bone, between

the transducera

bone,

not the

Dr. LANZL Have you taken your sample and moved

it closer to the transmitter

or made some sort of plot

of moving the sample in between your transmitter and receiver?

Dr. RICH. Yes, we have. There are a number of

problems which I did not touch on too much. The

transmission

signal strength is another

thing that we

can and do modulate.

This has considerable

influence.

Do you recall that diagram I had indicating

the ir-

regular shape?

If the signal strength

is low, these

things do not get transmitted

through a large amount

of tissue, increased,

whereas

if the signal strength

is greatly

you stnrt seeing it- There are other ex-

amples of the influence

of signal strengt_

With re-

gard to your question more specifically,

we pile samples

on top of each other; this makes no difference.

We

can move the samples away from or toward the trans-

ducers, the transreceiver,

or transmitter-transducer

without difference

except that if we move it close in,

then this has the effect of making troublesome.

these

things

more

Dr. LANZL. In your understanding

of the trabecular

bone, you are taking the bone and stretching

it out in

a sense. think ?

Maybe you are not as bad off as you might

Dr. RICH. I do not know if that formulation

I made

on the slide with the circuitous

route is correct.

The-

oretically, if it were simply a homogeneous

dispersion,

little round globs of bone in soft tissue, then I do not think we would be in any trouble so long as we get

146

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

the signal through.

We have tested this in various

ways by making solutions

of gela'tin, etc. to test the

fact that a given quantity us much the same result

of material

dispersed

as the same amount

gives of ma-

terial compacted. Dr. LANZL. HOW about

lamellae

if you again take a

sheet ? Dr. R_CH. That

is the point. That is what is hap-

pening in trabecular becular bone. If hole in it, if that

bone. This is .an analog of a tra-

we take a cortical

bone and drill a

hole is small, we do not see it. We

have not done what you have just suggested.

I have

no doubt whatsoever

that if this is the crystal size and

if we put a sample of lamellar bone in like this or some-

thing looking like a toothbrush

or comb, it will look to

the crystals

as if it were solid.

If you turn at right

angles, you get the result you should.

The number of

interfaces

at right angles is no pr()blem at all. If it is

a straight

line path, and when the transmission

signal

is intense enough, mitted down trips

then the first the mechanism.

signal that is transThis is something

we cannot get away from, other than by reducing

the

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

size or the cross sectional

area of the signal which we

are trying strength.

to do now by modulating

the transmission

Dr. R0CKOF_. You could theoretically

oscillate

the

bone at a very, very high frequency.

prove 'then at all the certainty

that

Would you imthe sonics are

going through more diffusely?

Dr. RICH. I really do not kn(_w. I doubt if this

would be practical.

There is little reason to believe

that the whole bone oscillates

at this frequency.

This

is quite a high frequency,

3 megacycles.

_'e have

thought

about rotating

the bone rather than our trans-

receivers.

What I thought you were going to ask about

is modulating

the frequency.

This is a real technical

problem

because

this is a pulse technique.

Once you

get into an FM technique,

it is very difficult.

Dr. MALETSKOS.

The kind of oscillation

Dr. Rockoff

is talking chanically

about would be of such frequency you could not get this?

that me-

Dr. RICH. I think we are more interested

in trying

to get a very well defined quencies may be helpful.

sharp beam.

Lower fre-

APPLICATION

OF TECHNIQUES

IN HUMAN STUDIES

H_au3_T POLLACK, Chairman

N 6- 768o

Rates of Involution of Vertebrae and Femur
in Aging

]_.s S. ARNOLD AND MURRAY H. Bxa_.EY Sumerlin Memorial Pathology Laboratory

During the last few days we have heard Dr.

Nordin and Dr. Mack discuss the X-ray quanti-

tation of vertebral mineralization

in living

patients. At this time, I would like to demon-

strate what the actual ash per unit volume in

vertebral centrums is, as measured in autopsy

specimens.

For some years now we have been cutting

rectangular

cubes from the mid-central

area

of the lumbar vertebra, measuring the external

dimensions with a caliper, and determining the

mineral per unit volume by ashing. In figure

1 the ash per cubic centimeter of vetebral

medullary tissue is plotted as a function of age.

The round dots represent the females and the

squares, males. It is apparent that during the

first 20 years of life there is a progressive in-

crease in the ash concentration

for both sexes,

and a progressive decrease in both sexes after

the age of 30. The levels of ash per cubic

centimeter

in females are always somewhat

lower than those of the males, but the shape and

the height of the curves are comparable.

The

data in figure 1 are derived entirely from cases

dying traumatic deaths, or from ruptured cere-

bral or abdominal aneurysms.

Myocardial in-

farcts were not included, as there is usually a question of chronic heart disease associated with these cases.

Figure '2 contains similar data of ash per cubic centimeter vertebral medullary tissue as a function of age for a variety of chronic disease states. Here we see a similar progressive decrease in vertebral ash concentration as a function of age. In addition, there are a definite

Acute

E.21

Disease

o,m .2]

I .11

.1_

roll

11011

Ę .E

Ę

0 .1_

Ę

.ó,.o.

I0

Ę OI

I ",++.r:i ore:

░ ĘĘ

,1{

I0

20

FmVRE 1.--Ash/c.e.

30

40

50

of vertebral _ge.

60

70

medullary

80

90

tissue

vs.

number of cases with an increased ash per cubic centimeter of vertebral tissue. These cases

correspond principally to cases of chronic renal

disease and are therefore thought to represent

osteosclerosis, which is not readily detected by

the usual teclmiques of pathologic examination.

The female cases, particularly,

show consider-

able reduction in ash per cubic centimeter in the

older ages, below those seen in the acute cases. Thus, there is indication that there is a definite

reduction in vertebral mineralization

in chronic,

debilitating disease, and more conspicuously so in females.

Dr. Nordin has earlier told us of his im-

149

150

DEV.ELOPMENT

OF METHODS

pression that some cases of vertebral osteo-

porosis are associated with narrowing

of the

femoral cortical bone, while others are not. In

autopsy material comparable data are seen. In

figure 3 the thickness of femoral diaphyseal

cortical bone is plotted against the ash per cubic

centimeter

of vertebral

medullary

tissue.

Again the females are plotted as circles and the

males as squares. The cases in the lower left-

hand corner of the graph represent cases where

both the femoral and vertebral atrophy have

taken place, while the cases on the upper left-

hand side correspond to cases where vertebral

atrophy occurred without apparent atrophy of

the femoral cortex. Virtually no cases are

present in the lower right side of the graph,

indicating that there are virtually no cases

where the femoral cortex atrophies in the

presence of a normal mineralization.

degree of vertebral

The female cases generally show considerable reduction in the femoral cortical thickness for

comparable amounts of vertebral mineraliza-

tion. This seems to be a consistent finding--

that the females show considerable

cortical

thinning as compared with men, throughout the age span, and more strikingly in old age. When cortical thickness is plotted against age, the females show progressive atrophy, or thinning,

E
.23
I_- .22 Ę-- .21
m20
░M'I .19

Chronic Disease
0

"17 _ m"186
"15
o "14
.13
.12 _ .n
_ .10 .09
Ę
.07
:.06
.05 10

0

o

Ęm m

Ę

0

0

0

Ę oĘ

o

Ę
o o om

c_oo

#

Ę
Ę

Ę o=

o

o';'_░0 Ęoo░'o

"o"-_'o"-.go.

] i'o.░

20

30

40

50 60

70

80 90

FIGURE

2.--Ash/c.c.

of vertebral age.

medullary

tissue

vs.

IN BONE

DENSITOMETRY

_t
all cases

o o

Io░Ę o

Ę ░o
oo oo

o

Ę

░o o

.06 .07 .08 .09 .10 ,]1
ash/co

12 .13 .14 .15 .16 .17 .18 .19 .20 .2) .22 ,23 .24

medu ary tissue

in gin.

FIGURE

3.--Maximum

femoral

cortical

thickness

vs.

ash/c.c,

vertebral

medullary

tissue.

of the femoral cortex as a function of age, while

the males seem to be divided into two popula-

tions. The largest population in femoral cortical thickness

shows no change as a function of

age, while a smaller population

appears to

atrophy in a manner comparable to that of the

female population.

It appears that there is

vertebral atrophy in virtually everybody, start-

ing at about 30 years of age, reaching a baseline

someplace in the vicinity of 90+ years of age. This is true for both males and females. The

females appear, throughout life, to have slightly lower values than males. The femoral cortical

bone is progressively thinning throughout life

in the females, while it appears to be constant

in thickness in the majority of males. It would

appear that the reason that the female aging

population

gets into trouble, from the stand-

point of vertebral and femoral fractures, is that

the vertebral atrophy occurs more rapidly.

Also the femoral atrophy begins with a thinner

starting value and occurs more rapidly in fe-

males. From the standpoint of vertebral min-

eralization,

the difference between men and

women then appears to be due chiefly to the

difference in behavior of cortical bone. Female

bones atrophy, while male bones do not.

RATES OF INVOLUTION

OF VERTEBRAE

AND FEMUR

IN AGING

151

COMMENTS

Dr. NORDIN. HOW did you measure the volume of the

vertebral sections ?

Dr. ARNOLD. It was done with a caliper.

I cut them

into cubes and measured

the cubes.

Initially

I fixed

the bone cubes in formaldehyde

and calculated

by

Archimedes'

principle, but the other technique is much

easier.

Dr. Nom)_. Have you made any attempt to correct

for the quite substantial

variation

which exists from

one part of the vertebral

body to the other?

You

notice that the central cubic centimeter

is somewhat

more porous and more vascular than the peripheral

part.

Dr. ARNOLD. Yes, they are all taken pericentrally.

I cut the vertebra

right down the middle, and then I

measure a piece on each side.

Dr. NORDIC. That is why your values are a little on

the low side as compared

to those of other research-

ers. Yours are right for the central cube of the verte-

bral body, but they would not be right for the whole

vertebral body.

Dr. A_NOLD. That is cortical bone. We have
Dr. RICH. Do I notice

right. now that

These are without the more than 300 cases. there is a sharp break in

the drop in the density menopause?
Dr. ARNOLD. Or the is taking all varieties

in beth males and females after

age corresponding

to this. This

of chronic disease that come to

the autopsy table.

The high ones are what you would

call osteosclerosis

; all of these individuals

have chronic

renal disease.

Dr. SMITH. Did yOU say which vertebral body you

were taking, in view of your comment which ones seem to be involved?

yesterday

about

Dr. ARNOLD. I have been measuring

usually the first

or third lumbar vertebra.

Some of these data have been

recorded over 5 years.

I have done different

experi-

ments and moved around, but within the first to the

third lumbar vertebra.

There is no relative difference

from the llth thoracic

vertebra

down through

the

fourth lumbar as far as I can determine.

In many of

these cases I have measured

three different vertebrae

and the values are virtually interchangeable.

Now, these values are lower in the chronic disease

case ; in other words, there are more osteoporotics.

I

would call anything osteoporotic

which fell below point

zero eight or certainly

point zero seven. But here again

the cut-off value is very difficult because you may have

eompre_ion

fractures all the way up to point zero nine,

but generally you do not see them until below point zero

six. In other words, the point at which patients

compression

fractures

does not seem to be

sively a matter of the mineral concentration

vertebrae.

have excluin the

Dr. S_ITH. In general, compression

fractures

relate

to osteoporesis

but not necessarily.

Dr. ARNOLD. That is right.

Dr. NORDIN. Another

point is that some of the

strength of the vertebral

body, no one knows quite

how much, is undoubtedly

due to the cortex.

And you

are measuring

the central cube of trabecular

bone?

Dr. ARnoLD. That is right, exactly. Dr. URIST. ThiS is physiological

reduction

of bone

mass. mass.

It is proportional

to the reduction

in muscle

Bone mass and muscle mass are reduced to-

gether, but you get just as much bone reduction

as

you do muscle atrophy.

This is something

that is in

a sense time dependent,

for which we use the word

aging.

We have no _ue_ what _":- word m_anz but

in a vague way this is a rate of reduction

of bone

mass with time.

It is normal in the United States and,

as Dr. Trotter showed, there is a curve for this for

Negro males, another

curve for Negro females,

and

another for white males.

This is a specific thing.

Where the physiologic

pic-

ture breaks off and becomes the disease entity, this is what seems vague to me, and I am not clear on this

yet, but I think that one is a disease and one is a

physiologic

process.

Dr. WHEDON. The prevalence

of diabetes increases

considerably

with age, particularly

after the age of

40, but we do not talk about physiological

diabetes

with aging.

Would you ?

Dr. URIST. I would not have any objection

to it if

you did.

Dr. WHEDON. My comment

is by way of objecting

to

the whole concept cal.

of calling an abnormality

physiologi-

Dr. NORDIN. I think that one is always up against

this problem:

When does an abnormality

become a

disease?

I think we should face this in a discussion

of osteoporosis,

about which we talk glibly.

Every-

body at this meeting has used the term without facing

up to the fact that it is very difficult to define what we

mean by it. I would suggest that if one were to look

at it in the sense that you can define an abnormality

in some sort of statistical

terms, and you can define

disease in some sort of clinical be able to break the situation

terms, then you might down into people who

have normal bones, and people who have the clinical

consequences

attached

For most parameters,

to it. of course,

we have the marvel-

ous Gaussian

distribution

of two standard deviations

about the mean. order of reduced

It appears that there is a clinical disbone volume which is very common

without

any corresponding

clinical

disorder

of in-

creased bone volume.

So, it is not possible to take the

mean amount of bone and two standard deviations

on

either side and say that is the normal range. It has a

grossly skew distribution.

We tried to tackle this

problem

by collecting

iliac samples

from the post-

mortem room and grading them according to the amount

of bone present

per unit volume.

We found that

the frequency

distribution

histogram

had a typical

peak representing

the normal population

and an ab-

normal tail on one side. Separation

of the normal

152

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

from the abnornml

takes place at a figure of approx-

imately 16% of the iliac crest sample occupied by bone.

That figure has been reached

quite independently

by the Dutch, who published

recently a series

vations

on really normal

people, volunteers,

of obserstudents,

etc., and reported

that the low limit of normal in the

iliac crest was 17%.

There is also a series of data

published

which comes out to exactly

the same figure,

a weight to v(flmne ratio of 1 in 6 which is almost ex-

actly the same as this. We have found in 275 consecu-

tive autopsies

that 23% of the women and 12% of the

men were below that figure.

Dr. RICH. What were their ages?

Dr. NORDIN. They were predominantly

elderly.

You

cannot call them a cross section of the aging population

because people who are dying in hospitals

are not con-

sidered a good cross section.

The figure cannot be far

off, inasmuch

as Caldwell and Collins,

the same thing on post mortems

using

in Sheffield did specific gravity

of the bone specimens.

They used specific gravity of

little cubes cut out of the vertebral

body as Arnold did.

They decided osteoporosis

was present

gravity of bone of 1.050 in a distribution

at a specific of this kind.

On that basis they obtained figures as we did.

almost exactly the same

Now as to when this becomes a disease, it seems to

me that this is very much easier to decide.

You can

take biconcavity

or compression,

or you can take inci-

dence of fractures

difficulty

I think

or any number of parameters. is not in defining the disease

The but in

defining

the point

at which

normality

becomes

abnormality. Dr. URIST. At this end of that tail you never see one

fracture

but a number

an X-ray examination

of fractures, of the upper

and if you make dorsal spine you

will see wedging of vertebral

bodies; those are micro-

scopic compression

fractures.

They are always asso-

ciated with some ballooningof and a thin cortex, and there

the disk, calcified is a spectrum.

aorta,

In my definition

I require all four or five of these in-

dices before I call it a disease.

Women are the ones

that are most likely to get this disease

longest longevity

and the best health.

; they have the Usually they

do not have other diseases; is a white woman.

the longest lived mammal

Dr. MALETSKOS. It is clear that physicians

have the

same problem that a physicist has. They do not know

when the signal has come out of the background.

Dr. GARN. If these things weren't

happening

with

age, we would not be dying. I do not think we have to

worry really about whether we must use age as a ref-

erence standard,

but we should merely

below certain amounts of bone, regardless

observe that of age, the

probability

of fractures

increases.

I think that we are

all interested,

regardless

of our age, in not breaking

our bones when we step out of the door. I believe that

that is what we are trying to find out about here.

Dr. SCHRAER. I would" like to go back to the problem

of densitometry

by X-ray: monochromatic,

and perhaps

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

the ultrasonic

methods.

We have heard all these meth-

ods discussed.

As I see it now, the film method, as it

now stands, is as good as anything

that has been dis-

cussed up to this point. However,

the monochromatic

method seems more promising.

Dr. RICH. I hate to get into this fray over aging and

osteoporosis,

but it seems to me that we are fixing on a

common

very gross parameter,

that is, loss of bone

density

to identify

a process which undoubtedly

goes

on with age and which probably

is a composite

of

several other pathological

processes

that give the same

picture.

I think that the confusion,

the difference

of

opinion that many people hold probably

may stem from

the fact that we have not developed

the ability to look

at and understand

osteoporosis,

good diagnostic

criteria.

and we do not have

I think, Dr. Urist, that you are way off when you

won't accept a person with osteoporosis

until she has

so nmch vertebral

collapse

that her skin is draped

around her hips.

Dr. URIST. I said that I recognize

osteoporosis

as a

disease if there is a combination

of signs.

Dr. RICH. Can't you believe that some people with

this disease do not have these grotesque

manifestations

of it, just as, for instance,

you can have an aortic

aneurysm

without a rupture?

Dr. URIST. YOU can have an aortic aneurysm

without

a rupture,

but I do not think you see this disease that

we call osteoporosis

unless you have a spectrum

of

changes throughout

the whole spinal column, through-

out the whole anatomy

of the patient's

skeletal system.

You cannot select bone density as one criterion,

because

more than bone density is involved.

The bones are not

only reduced in density but they are reduced in quality ; they are reduced in form. When you see the change in

a bone, titative a piece structure

this does not mean that there has been a quan-

reduction

in bone mass as though you cut out

of bone. You know very well that the whole

of the bone changes,

horizontal

trabecu-

lae absorbed,

and the vertical

ones remain.

When

you get biconeavity, does not mean that

here is another

good example.

It

the cortical end plates have frac-

tures because the bone is insufficient.

It means that

throughout

a period Of years the bone structure

has

been remodeled

to make this shape.

In other words, a

dynamic

cellular process has produced

these changes.

Dr. RICH. If your hesitancy

in making a diagnosis

of osteoporosis

is simply because

you feel the diag-

nostic criteria

are very poor and the clinical ones are

lacking, then we are in agreement.

Dr. URIST. I think they are poor.

Dr. WHF_DON. On the other hand, when you say you

do not have osteoporosis

until the end result, I think

we are wasting time at the end of a dead-end street ; we

are going nowhere,

and we will never get to the point

where we can diagnose treat or prevent further

osteoporosis bone loss.

early enough to In your criteria

your patient

does not have diabetes

until he has had

RATES OF INVOLUTION

OF VERTEBRAE

AND FEMUR

D
IN AGING

153

acidosis a dozen times.

The trend in diabetic diag-

nosis, however,

is to find ways to detect pathologic

physiology

in the early state called "prediabetesJ'

We

have to look for ostcoporosis

well in advance of multi-

ple fracture_

When the patient has demineralization

of the skeleton that is obvious to the radiologist

with

densitometry

techniques,

he has osteoporosis.

We do

not have to wait for him to fracture and go into a cast

before we say he has osteoporosis.

Early diagnosis is

one of the purposes

of developing

a sound densito-

metric technique. Dr. _sxos.

I would like to make a few comments

on the techniques

discussed

yesterday

and today.

I

want to mention two other methods.

One is a device

called an isodensitometer

which is an automatic

device

for plotting density in such a way that you plot density

increments.

This can result in a plot that looks like a

contour map, and the scale at which this is done can

be controlled.

You can take an area of bone on an

X-ray film and expand it as much as you want on

paper, and at the same time draw in the contour lines

of isodensity.

This may have immediate

application,

and perhaps none of you know such a device exists, but

it may be useful to you.

Dr. UI_IST. Equal lines of equal density are plotted.

You can visualize

the contour

system put on.

Dr. GARN. It is available as

by seeing an attachment

the coding and can

be obtained

from National

Instrument

Laboratories,

Rockville,

Md.

Dr. MALETSKOS. A second technique, on which I have

been working, is the use of neutron activation

analy-

sis in determining

calcium iN rico.

You are familiar

with neutron activation

analysis because you can do it

on a sample by putting a sample in a reactor, activating

it with neutrons,

and counting

the activity

that is

formed.

By proper arrangement

of the experiment,

you can do this on a human being without excessively

irradiating

him. You can do this not only with a

reactor beam but even with a neutron generator.

I

have been working on this phase, trying to do it by

measuring

the calcium in a part of a bone, say the

lining of a finger bone. What you measure

is liter-

ally calcium.

This is a first approach

to getting

at

the chemical

composition

of a particular

material.

The great advantage

of this technique is that it meas-

ures calcium.

The calcium concentration

of soft tissue

is negligible,

so you measure calcium in bone.

A group in Britain have carried this one step further

and have used a neutron generator

to safely irradiate

at least two human beings.

They are using the tech-

nique to study body composition.

They can measure

the sodium the calcium

and chlorine and claim they can measure also. There is no doubt that this is going

to be a useful technique

in the very near future.

It

will be used for determination

of body composition

of a few select elements

and, in addition,

for trace

elements.

It can be used also for doing some elegant

tracer techniques

by making the radioactive

material

radioactive

in situ as it normally

occurs, rather than

by injecting it and waiting for it to redistribute,

as it

may, in a very short period of time. This whole field

I have been calling iN vivo neutron activation,

and

it is somthing we might examine in the future-

Dr. WH_)ON. I heard you make a presentation

last

summer at the Gordon Conference

on this technique.

You cited certain

advantages

and certain disadvan-

tage6. I came away from your presentation

feeling

rather pessimistic

about the future.

Did I misunder-

stand you or has something vening 6 or 8 months?

happened

in the inter-

Dr. _sxos.

If I gave a pessimistic

view that

was my intention.

The technique

is not easy and I

was trying to keep from making it sound as if it were

a cinch. There are a great many physical problems involved in arriving at the answer which is believable,

even with X-ray densitometry

and with the use of

isotopes.

The difficulties

that occur in these fields

where both medical physicists

and medical biologists

are involved is that each looks at the problems strictly

from his own point of view and their ideas no not

meet. I was trying to measure

mass of calcium per

unit volume of bone. I was carrying it one step fur-

ther. I wanted

to be sure that I had a uniform

neutron flux throughout

a large volume.

At the time

I gave the talk I was not sure I could get it. Now I am a good deal more confident.

Experimenters

in Britain

claim uniform

neutron

flux through the body. we differ about what

This is one of the points where

the experiment

really does. I

think they are going to get it eventually

and whoever

joins in the work will eventually

get it.

Dr. LANZL What energy neutrons are you using?

If you are using slow neutrons, you would not be able

to get a very uniform

distribution.

The relaxation

length is about 7 or 8 cm ; therefore

you could not get

a uniform distribution

in the body, even though

you might have a rather uniform

flux.

in air

Dr. _sxos.

There are various ways of doing

this with slow neutrons and with fast neutrons.

For

calcium it will work very well and will not be influ-

enced by the fact that other constituents

of the body

will become active, namely, sodium and chlorine, be-

cause the energy of the calcium is so high it can be

easily delineated.

One other comment.

With regard to calibration,

some

of the speakers

have been reluctant

to talk either

about a mass of bone or composition

of bone. In

some of the work actual bone pieces have been used

as a standard.

I think it may be worthwhile

to con-

sider what might be a standard bone material.

This

can be done by combining

a series of elements in a

plastic matrix, much as I have done in our case with

calcium carbonate in lucite.

You can make a uniform

distribution

and you can machine it into any shape.

Something that approaches

closely the normal chemical

154

q
DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

composition

of bone would be a material

that we

should

consider

measurements.

to which we could refer all our

In my particular

calcium;

therefore

case, I am interested I was using calcium

in activating

carbonate

be-

cause nothing else would be activated.

In other tech-

niques that have been described

this could not be done,

and other material

would have to be added.

I would

not suggest that you take just bone, clean it with ethyl ene diamine, powder it, and combine it with lucite, be-

cause there might be variations

from bone to bone. A

standard

chemical agent should be used.

In conclusion,

you will note that the field of densi-

tometry

is growing

and expanding

at a fast pace.

The "eye" was the densitometer

and interpreter

for

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

a long time.

X-ray densitometry

has been introduced.

This has increased

sensitivity

and accuracy

and is

holding

its own at the moment.

Many other

niques are being examined.

We are introducing

techmore

variables;

therefore

we will be able to get more

answers.

At the same time we are paying a higher

price because

the field is becoming

more and more

complicated. will have

As a result, to ask different

physicians

and

types of questions

biologists because

they will be able to get more information

and they

will be able óo dig a little bit deeper.

We are in a

growing

phase not only from the physical

point of

view but from a biological,

medical

point of view.

The last workshop

did not offer

with today's findings.

much

when

compared

The Application of Measurements of Bone Volume and Spinal Density

B. E. C. NOr.DIN, D. A. SMITH, J. MxcG_cov., Ato J. A_EssoN General Infirmary, University of Leeds

We have applied the measurements of cortical thickness, bieoncavity, and spinal density to patients referred with backache and suspected osteoporosis, to a series of cases of steatorrhoea, and to patients on cortico-steroid therapy. Some of the results are reported in this paper.

VISUAL ASSESSMENT DENSITOMETRY

AND

To test the clinical significance of relative vertebral density (R,V.D.), we have compared it with visual assessment of films as shown in

figure 1. We c.la_ified 119 unseleeted films as

+3-0

+2.0

_1-0

.8

N

IO .6,

-4"

.2"

0

O

a

.4"

I.

-O"

go

re

- 1.0"

-2-0

:"

7

.:.

.=

.-"

m ee

eee

":'.

.=

IIO

Ę

Ę

ee

Ę

...

-3"0

i
NORMAL

I
DOUBTFUL

Ę -3-7 Ę-4-4 --
Ę-7-7
OSTEOPOROTIC

FmURE 1.--Comparison

between visual assessment

of 119 unselected

X-ray films with relative vertebral

Visual assessment

was performed

without knowledge

of the patient's

age, sex, or R.V.D.

density.

792-955 O_11

155

156

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

'.

"normal," "doubtful," or "osteoporotic," without knowledge of $litho patient's age, sex, or
R.V.D. Films %ere classified as osteoporotic
if there was vertical trabeculation, biconcavity, or compression present; they were classified as "normal" if none of these features were present and vertebral density appeared normal; they were classified as "doubtful" if there were any doubts about vertebral density. Comparison of this simple (and highly reproducible) c l a d -
fication with the R.V.D.(fig. 1.)shows reason-
able agreement between the two. However, there are two anomalous films with high R.V.D. values which were classified as "osteoporotic" and two as "doubtful": one of these is a case of acute osteoporosis following an artificial menopause, one is a case of osteomalacia, and two are cases of renal failure.
I n the osteoporotic case the anomaly consists of the association of biconcavity and compres-
I
FIGUR2E.-Lumbar spine X-ray in a case of acute postnienopausal o s ~ o p o r ~wi sith noma1 vertebral density and normal metacarpal cortical thickness.

1 FEMALES BACKACHE

I
I
1

+3

I

+?

I I

. +I.
.. . .. o.-..----
. . . . .... . . . . .-. 0 . .. . j. -1.' .

I
.I

- - - - _ -_..I _

:. I . -.: *..

:

...I

I

a

.

*:

d -2 -

. .I

-3 -

.I

. .I
-4-
I

FIGUR3E.-Relation between biconcavity index and relative vertebral density in women with backache.

sion (fig. 2) with normal density, suggesting

that meohanical strength and X-ray density are

not necessarily determined by the same factor.

Repeated X-rays on this patient have con-

firmed this anomaly, which is emphasized by the

fact that her metacarpal cortical thickness is

normal ( 5 2 % ) . Figure 3 illustrates this para-

dox again and shows that there is little relation
betwen R.V.D. and the biconcavity index.

We have frequently observed an apparent

sclerosis of the vertebrae in osteomalacia not

unlike that which may be seen in renal failure
(fig. 4), and we find that the R.V.D.tends

to confirm this (figs. 8 and 9 ) . While it is

strictly true that bone density may be reduced

either by reduced bone volume (osteoporosis)

or by reduced bone mineralization (osteoma-

lacia), it Seems that, in the spine at least, the

osteomalacic process tends to produce a differ-

ent appearance from the osteoporotic one.

Osteoporosis may be associated with osteoma-

lacia, and this probably explains why an ostw-

lacic spine is sometimes indistinguishable

from an osteoporotic one. Cortical thickness

tends to be low in the osteomalacia cases (figs. 8

and 9), but whether tihis is actually osteoporosis

Of the

Or osteomalacia (Or both),

cannot be stated.

**

BO&% VOLCME kW SPLIAL DENSIT'Y MEASCREMEhT APPLICAmON

157

2.2 ,
i

.

- TOTAL
- SCORE

.... ; 8 :::I

+

0

IO

20

30 40

M 60

70

80

90

LQE

FIGUBFEj.--Relation befxeen total X-ray wore (sum of metacarpal, vertebral, and spinal indices) and age in normal ,whjects and in cases of snspwted osteoporosis to show how the former merge into the latter.

FIGUBE 4.-Latcral lnmhar Wine X-ray in a case of osteomalacia to show apparent sclerosis of the rertehrae.
PATIENTS WITH BACKACHE
We have preriouslF reported that patients referred with backache and a presumptive diagnosis of osteoporosis hare X-raj-indices rather lower than those of normal people, but they represent an extension of the nornial state rather than a qualitatively different state. This supports our general concept that there is a continuum from normality into osteoporosis depending upon the amount of bone pmwnt,. This is illustrated in figure 5 which shows how our original normal series appears to continue onward mid downward into our backache series.
Jfucli of the same is true of densitometry. TT'e have described the fall of relatire 1-ertebral densit>- (R.V.D.) with %g-ein normal indiriduals elsei~herein this volume. Figure 6 shorn how the patients with suspected osteoporosis extend from the nornial range downward as though osteoporosis were no more than a con-

1
Iz 50
301a
4.
= 20

FEMALES
BACKA-CHE.- . .* .*" ....<.........3 .-%.: ..---.-9..*.:..,.--.*..-I-.....e....*-..*.-:..-.....*..

+li+3

i:-I -2

- . -

-

.
-.

...-..7 t :...:... ;.a..................

- ':.. - :->:&'- L .

.. . ..**:

*.-

-

--

. . . . . . .
**--*~*

-i

4 eo io zb io do sb 60 76

90

AGE

F I C r s E &-Relatire vertebral densit.r (below) and metacarpal index (ahore) related to age in xomen presenting n-ith backache. The horizontal haw rep resent the normal mean values.

158
+2+I.
0" ..... d
-I'

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

Ę ,I Ę *'.,
:- -: "Ę- !-.:._-- :"" " .... Ę .,,...._ : .:.:
Ę ..: "I ":

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
PATIENTS WITH STE,4TORRHOEA
R.V.D. values in 30 men and 39 women with steatorrhoea are shown in figure 8. There is a distinct tendency for the values to be high, especially in the mean and particularly in cases of oste_malacia. The corresponding metacarpal indices are shown in figure 9 and are distinctly low. Thus, the relation between compact and trabecular bone is abnormal in steatorrhoea with disproportionate loss of compact bone.

o ,b iĘ _ ,io .io i,o iĘ 8b

METACARPAL

INDEX ░1o

FIGURE 7.--Relation and metacarpal

between relative index in patients

vertebral presenting

density with

backache

(compare

with fig. 17).

tinuation or accentuation of a normal process. The relation between R.V.D. and metacarpal index is also very similar in the cases of suspected osteoporosis to what it is in the normal women, although both the R.V.D. and metacarpal values tend to be lower (fig. 7).

+S'O +4-0 +3-0
+2.0 41'(
-I.( -2"(

MAt.[
«
?
.,--l..*z-
«

FEMALE o

_---**

Ę

*_

-4'

3O 40

SO 60 70

30 40

SO e_ 7'0

AGE

FIGURE 8.--Relative

vertebral

densities

plotted

age in 30 men and 39 women with steatorrhoea.

izontal bars represent

mean normat values

Ę _osteomalacia

).

against Hor-
(X and

70

MALES

STEATORR, HOEA
Ę

Ę

FEMALES

x 6O
UJ

J

_ 40

Ęi

Ig

.<

_ 30

I

o

. .-g--..._ o

i

Ę

IE :)0
4o _ _,c_ 7o _o 4o ._ _b 7o
AGE

FIGURE 9.--Metacarpal

indices

30 men and 39 women with

Ę =osteoanalacia

).

plotted against steatorrhoea

age in (X and

CORTICO-STEROID

THERAPY

Assessment of vertebral density in patients on cortico-steroid therapy is immensely complicated by the number of variables involved. There is the age and sex of the patient, the underlying disease, the type of cortico-steroid used, and duration of therapyĘ Simple measurement of X-ray density or cortical thickness is, therefore, by itself of little value. We have tried to overcome this to some extent by converting all the cortico-steroids into their equivalent in grams of cortisone and examining the spinal density in relation to the total dosage given. This has yielded the results shown in figure 10 and suggests that the effect of corticosteroids on spinal density is a function of the total dose given. The relationship shown in figure 10 cannot be explained by the age of the patients, which is not 1elated to the total dose given.

o

Q

DENSITOMETRY

4 2"5-

4-3

BONE VOLUME

AND SPINAL

STEROIDS ONLY

* 2-0-

░ 1-5-
_1"0-

*0-5-
o

Ę

I

$

Ęó

- 0-5-1-0-

O0

00

DENSITY

MEASUREMENT

APPLICATION

159

real values observed in patients with biconcavity

require explanation.

Finally, the effect of cal-

cium therapy on spinal density is disappointing, but we do not know whether this is the fault

of the therapy or of the densitomotry.

COMMENTS

Dr. SMITH. In a study of _avo thousand women com-

parable to your normal group which we have surveyed

in a similar fashion, we find that between the ages on

65 and 70 years 11% ]aave fractures

(one or more

vertical compression

fractures)

and that 20% in the

age group 70 to 75 have the same findings and are

-1-5'

-2-0o

I

I

20 40

-4.7

I

I

_

I

!

(50 80 100 120 140 160

TOTAL STEROID DOSAGE IN GRAMS CORTISONE

I_GU_ lO.--Relation

bet_ween relative

vertebral

den-

sity and total steroid dosage expressed

as grams of

cortisone

in patiertts on cm't_ico-sterMd

therapy.

EFFECT OF CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTS

Calcium glyeerophosphate

grams, 6 daily (1

g. Ca), have been given to 66 patients for over

1 years. Figure 11 shows the change in R.V.D.

related to the subjective response of the patient.

There does not appear to be any consistent change in spinal density on calcium therapy.

CONCLUSIONS

The validity of our procedure for measuring vertebral density appears to be supported by the following observations:
1. The relative vertebral density falls with

age, especially in women after the menopause.

2. Relative vertebral density is generally re-

lated to metacarpal in women.

cortical thickness, at least

3. There is general agreement between visual assessment of films and the relative vertebral

density.

On the other hand, the precision, accuracy,

and reproducibility

of the method still leave a

good deal to be desired; and the occasional nor-

„3

+2

+1
ói
O
_r
-I
-2
-3
-4

O0

Ę

Ę

|

Ę

Ę

'T

I 4

S

OQ

O,

II

-5

A

B

C

D

FIG_'RE ll._.hanges

in relative vertebral density in 66

patien_ts treated with calcium glycerophosphate

sup-

plements for at least 1 year.

The cases have been

classified

according

to subjective

responses

as fol-

lows: (a) pain free; (b) much improved ; (c) doubt-

ful improvement

; (d) no change.

160

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

asymptomatic.

I share your conviction

that there is

little if any relationship

between the degree of osteo-

porosis with or without fractures

and symptoms.

Dr. NORDIN. HOW did you select your two thousand ?

Dr. SMITH. These were ambulatory

outpatients

who

came in for routine physical

examinations.

I have a

question

in regard to the aorta and the spine.

This

seems rather peripheral,

but I think it may be impor-

tant ultimately.

Did you correlate

whether

calcifica-

tion was present or not, or did you quantitate

it? I

can see how osteoporosis

might not correlate

with

whether

aortic calcification

is present or not, but did

you give a score?

We have done this with the two

thousand

patients

and we find a higilly significant

correlation

when you give aortic calcification,

a score,

age corrected.

Dr. NORDIN. NO, we did not. It was in the British

Jourrml of Radiology

about 6 months ago. This was

done on a lumbar basis.

We did give a quantitative

I
score but we did not use it. We thought

it was too

subjective.

On an all or none basis, there was only one

10 year group in which there was even a suggestion

of

a correlation.

I agree that in practice one sees the cal-

cium in the aorta in association

with osteoporos_is ; one

feels there must be somethil_g in it.

Dr. SMITH. Osteophytosis

or hypertropie

changes do

correlate

inversely.

Dr. NORDIN. We hardly ever see them in osteoporosis.

This must be of some interest,

I agree.

Dr. URIST. We are doing a decade s_udy.

We are

measuring

the amoun,t of calcium

in milligrams

per

kilogram

of aorta in 50 cases.

I am now doing the

aorta, fascia, skin, and la,teral views of the dorsal and

lumbar spine, and I am trying to quantitate

this. My

sample

is much different

from Smi, th's, Nordin's,

Rich's, or Whedon's;

they see a much younger

age

group.

I do not see them until they have fractures.

Out of a thousand

ca'ses I would only see the end

picture of this spectrmn.

Dr. RIC_. I was very interested

in the association

between

spines and fingers.

.This seems to bear ou't

that many people feel ,that trabeculav

bone and corti-

cal 'bone may react differently

in these diseases.

I

can't comment

on a thousand

cases, but in one patient

who was treated

with fluoride for 2 years, we have

seen X-ray density

ch,anges.

Others have also seen

these changes.

I think Dr. Vose, in association

with the group at Lahey, has seen then_ in a couple

of patients.

My purpose,

however,

is to indicate

where the changes are seen. This is over a period of

a hundred

weeks of treatment.

The changes in the

main portion

of phalanx,

using Schraer's

method

interpreted

by Dr. Schraer in terms of value changes,

are not great, maybe 10%, which would probably

be

the same as the 10% change in 'the ratio that you

measure, whereas the os ealsis increased

by twice tha,t

much.

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Using Doyle's

method,

_s accurate

as Schraer's

proba_oly method

in our hands in his hands,

not the

changes where

in the distal several centimeters

there is txabecular

bone were

of the ulna three or four

times as great as in cortical 'bone.
I wan, t to make one

the area comment

which is primarily

on Vhe sclerosis

you

see in osteomalaeia,

which is extremely

interesting

and to me seems a little parodoxieal.

.Since there is a

_rea,t deal of secondary

hyperpa,vathyroidism

in such

a patient, somehow

one wonders

whether

be related ,t_ increased

this sclerosis

could

turnover.

I wonder

if you had any vertebral

roidism

patients.

We

report think

on *the hyperparathy-

primarily

.they are

sclerotic.

Dr. NORDIN. I had the same feeling that

be a manifestation

of hyperparathyroidism.

this could ,In a

vague sort it in renal

of way failure.

it might I agree

_e, in,asmueh

as you see

with you. I do not have

the figures

on the hyperparathyroidism

cases.

I

think there to histology,

is one possible exception. I am not sure what

When you come

histological

effect

hyperparathyroidism Dr. RICH. There

would produce. is also increasing

evidence

f_hat in

addition formation.

parathyroid

hormone

does stimulate

bone

Dr. NORDIN. I agree.

Dr. GILSON. Dr. Cohen yesterday

proposed

a multi-

gamma analysis

method of determination

components

of the bone ;anatomy.

I would

of various like to ex-

pand where heads,

upon ,this to ,show you where we have g_one and

we have not gone, Where we have bumped

our

and where we have been successful.

In aq_out 1962, we decided ,to make some naive at-

tempts in the measuring

of bone densit_)mstry

using

radio isotope techr_iques.

We _ried 'this with simple

densitometers

and, of course, we did not get what we

wa_ted.

In defense of the bone densitometric

people

using film techniques,

I must say we certainly

were

not doing the 'type of work which has been expounded

here. I had the good fortune 4to fall upon a monograph by Dr. Carl M.onnel, 'and his classic work stimulated

us to think more about the monochromatic

energies.

The first attempt

was to _se Tm _. A't this time ,the

search

for what was available

in monochromatic

sources in the low energy range was pretty barren.

I would like to show you first the .spectrum

of Tm _.

Tm _ has a gamma ray of approximately

53.1 and in

the 80 region.

,We thought

it would be just dandy

because

we decided

on a multi-gamma

technique.

Using very ments

thin good
on

sources spectra aluminum

in .small quantities

we obtained

and very good absorption

measure-

foils and (_ther absorbers.

As

soon as we got into larger sources, unfortunately

the

high energy

B-rays of thulium

,showed up and we

had a spectrum

isotopic

choice.

'tha't just abou't knocked it out as an

:The spectrum,

of course,

was no

longer monochromatic.

BONE VOLUME

AND SPINAL DENSITY

MEASUREMENT

AP'PL_CATION

161

It was soon after this that Dr. Cameron recorded

the use of I =s. We immediately

obtained

the source

and went through his techniques

and had absolutely

no trouble in reproducing

his results.

We decided to take a look at some of the brems-

strahlung

sources and actually

used and constructed

this particular

type device.

It basically consists of a

rather large Sr _ source upon which target materials

are placed and a small X-ray generator

a_ the source

bombarding

the various

target

materials

and the

shutter, raolatlon.

giving

us a flux of various

"K" alpha

Now, we have relatively

good clean curves.

With a

Cerium Uranium

target, we obtained

quite good peaks.

We were again very happy except that our flux once

again did not measure

up to what we wanted.

The

size of the Shielding

material

became so prohibitive

as we went up in size that we had to abandon

this.

Now, why are we spending all this time looking for a

multigamma

approach?

In Dr. Cameron's

laboratory,

if he gave me a result, I would be absolutely

sure this

was correct.

In the reseach laboratory

with many of

the instruments

devised by the investigators

and with

close attention

to detail, the Techniques

work fine.

The problem is that when this is turned into a clinical

laboratory

(and I am a radiologist),

is important

to _ry to eliminate

we know that it as many of the

variables

as possible to make this a practical

clinical

tool.

We wanted

to take as many of the variables

out as we could, and Dr. Cameron I am sure will tell

me I have introduced

more variables

by adding an-

other parameter.

We feel, however,

that, in the long

run, probably

in the clinical lab, not in the closely

controlled

research

la'b, but in the clinical

will be less of a problem.

lab, this

The problem

is what to do about measurement

of

bone density

in flight.

I believe from what I can

read and from what I have heard that measurements

of actual cumbersome

soft ti_mue parts

chore.

I think

in flight would be a ve_ over a long period of time

we cannot assume that the soft tissue part is going

to stay the same size. There will probably be changes

in mas's of so_ tissue.

If every time one has to do

a measurement

between

various

in flight one has to compress

parts

restraining

tools, I think the proce-

dure in flight, although

it i.s a very simple one in

theory, would become a very cumbersome

chore.

The true gamma technique

would obviate the neces-

sity for these soft tissue measurements.

This again is

one of the reasons that the two-time

we feel, so far as NASA is concerned,

technique

has possibilities.

If one

goe_ to the arm, the hand, or the _ calsis, it is relatively easy to measure these parts and to restrain them

between

plexiglass

sandwiches.

In the head of the

femur, for instance, or ne_'k of the femur, I think this

becomes more difficult.

I am not arguing about the

basic physical premise of the single gamma technique.

I am simply saying that I think for many applica-

tions this _qll not be as satisfactory

as using the multi-

gamma technique

which will obviate the necessity for

the additional

measurements.

Utilizing

the bremsstrahlung

sources, we obtained

very good

inspection-mentioned

tracings.

One could

go out and trace over the soft tissue part to find out

where the soft tissue started and where the cortical

bone was and one could actually _ the marrow cavity

on the opposite several animals.

side. We measured The determination

these cavities

on

of bone size per

se is quite accurate

collimated

beam.

with a very highly confined

A machine has been constructed

for the explicit pur-

pose of using the multigamma

technique.

Right now

we are most interested

in just analyzing

the dual-

gamma measurement.

We hope to go on to the tri-

gamma measurement and so on up to seven.

for analysis

of the third factor

There is no one technique

that will solve all the

problems.

Yet I think this is a technique

which has

to be investigated.

So many of the problems

that we

have in nuclear medicine

or in medicine

in general in-

volve the measurement

of multicompartmental

systems

in dynamic states.

Here we have a very good physical

model in a sense.

Things are not changing

during the

brief time that the exposure

is made.

We know a

good many of the physical parameters

involved, and for

the purposes steady state.

of the measurement

everything

is in

I see no reason why one should stop with

a one-gamma

system when it is theoretically

(and I

use the word theoretically

in context here) possible to

go on to greater The machine

accuracies. uses a Siemen's

tube from their electro-

meter apparatus.

We closely control the ripple of our

high voltage supply and try to keep the output stable.

We hope to go on to better power supplies.

generators

and more stable

We use a vibrating

electronic

type ionization

cham-

ber, and have used GM counters

and scintillation

de-

tectors.

We found this electrometer

very useful.

You

can produce a multiplicity

among

beams utilizing proper filtration.

monochromatic

X-ray

The reason for the development

of the multigamma

technique

is that we have a problem

that is in a stable

state, where the basic laws of physics can be utilized.

These mass absorption

measurements

of layers have

been done since the very first days of radiation.

I think

it is possible, utilizing known absorption

coefficients and

known, carefully

collinmted

monochromatic

beams, to

ashy not just the bone content of an individual's

part,

hut to measure

the fat to muscle ratio, and the fat to

lean mass ratio.

Computer

techniques

are obviously

going to be needed in the future.

We think this is a new approach

which we feel has

fertile ground.

We are in the beginning

of it.

Dr. CAMERO_ _. Maybe Dr. Gilson feels I am against

the multigamma

technique.

In fact, in Science we

pointed out the formulas

which are essentially

identical

162

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

to the ones Dr. Cohen presented

yesterday.

You are

absolutely right ; in theory it is possible. I think Dr. Gilson also is aware of the
on Low Energy X-ray Sources, where we

Symposium showed the

use of a two-component

system to determine

the fat

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

to muscle ratio in phantom.

But again I want to re-

Peat: as you go further,

there are some very difficult

technical

problems.

I think anybody

who can lick

them is going to have to work hard.

I am willing to

encourage

them to do so, but I do want to caution them.

Estrogens and Postmenopausai
Osteoporosis

NEts M. Srr.A_-DIOItD Department of Radiology,

The University

of Chicago and LAWRENC_ H. LA_CZL

Department of Radiology, The University of Chicago and thc Argonne Cancer

Research Hospital

It has long been known that with the cessa-

tion of ovarian function, or the decrease of ovar-

ian function to a point below adequate amounts

to maintain normal adult function, changes oc-

cur throughout the body. These changes occur

at about the age 45 to 55 in the usual course of

events. The same changes occur prior to the

normal menopause in the case of bilateral oo-

phorectomy performed at an age prior to the

natural decrease or complete cessation of pro-

duction of estrogens. As a woman approaches

and passes through occurs an alteration

the menopause, in the function

there also of the ad-

renal cortex. The production of gonadal-like

hormones, particularly estrogen, by the adrenal

cortex diminishes steadily with aging. How-

ever, the production of glucocorticoid hormones

by the adrenal cortex persists at the adult level.

It can be said that, in general, the gonadal

hormones such as estrogen have an anabolic ac-

tion upon protein and osseous tissues. The glu-

cocortieoid hormones have an antianabolic or,

in some cases, a catabolic action upon the same

tissues. In young adulthood there is a balance

between the production of these two types of

hormones.

With aging, women develop a rela-

tive excess of the antianabolic steroids due to

the continued decreased production of the gonadal hormones (from the ovaries and adrenal

cortex) and the sustained production

glucocorticoid

hormones

(from the

cortex).

Structures

other than the

of the adrenal skeleton

also show changes following the menopause.

These changes are chiefly atrophic. The target

organs of the gonadal hormones, the vagina,

uterus, vulva, and breasts, demonstrate

pro-

found atrophic changes. Other general physi-

cal changes also take place--thinning

of the

skin, loss of muscle mass, and changes in the hair. The addition of hormones such as stil-

bestrol can produce remarkable reversal of these

changes. The addition of small amounts of stil-

bestrol causes thickening of the vaginal mucosa

and changes in the glycogen content of the cells

to premenopausal

levels. The most important

change, however, in the postmenopausal

patient

is the gradual loss of bone mass.

0steoporosis,

the loss of bone mass, is the

most common systemic disease of the skeleton

and, in its severe form, is the most disabling of

all the degenerative

(aging) effects of the men-

opause. In some patients this is mild; but in

others it is severe and leads to complications

such as bone pain, loss of height due to collapse

of vertebrae, and the thinning of the long bones,

which makes the patient more susceptible to

fractures, particularly

of the hip. The major-

ity of patients with fractures of the hip in

the postmenopausal

female show osteoporosis,

which is more severe than the so-called normal

osteoporosis or decrease in bone mass, which is

the finding in all patients who reach old age.

In the group of postmenopausal

patients, in

whom the reduction of bone mass is accelerated,

163

164

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

clinical symptoms are l_su_lly present. Oste-

oporosis of a clinical'degree

is four to six times

more common in females than males. Patients

with postmenopausal

and senile osteoporosis are

improved by the addition of estrogens alone.

The bone pain disappears and the decrease in

height due to the collapse of vertebrae ceases.

Many attempts to document the changes in the

skeleton secondary to the addition of hormones

have been made. Drs. Paul C. Hodges and

Franklin C. McLean, working with Dr. M. Ed-

ward Davis, made radiographs on a large group

of patients on supplemental

postmenopausal

hormone therapy, but were totally unable to de-

tect any changes. In view of the material pres-

ented at this conference, this is not surprising.

Dr. M. Edward Davis, Chairman of the De-

partment of Obstetrics and Gynecology at The

University of Chicago, 25 years ago began giv-

ing stilbestrol as a replacement

of natural

(ovarian) hormones following oophorectomy.

These patients with few exceptions have been

on stilbestrol 0.5 mg, 3 times a week, continuous-

ly since oophorectomy.

It was largely to study

this group of patients that we invested time and

effort in our 1125 densitometry

apparatus.

This group of patients has been studied ex-

tensively with serial EKG tracings, vaginal

smears and biopsies, and serum cholesterol and

lipid determinations

to assess the effects of stil-

bestrol in retarding the aging process. The

results of this study will be published shortly.

The subjective feeling of well being in patients

on stilbestrol postmenop'anse

is well known.

We are interested in objective evidence of re-

tardation of aging; in our case, the possible

effect of hormones on osteoporosis.

We will

present today the data on our studies of bone

density in this group of patients.

We have compared the patients postbilateral

oophorectomy

with supplemental

hormones

(stilbestrol 0.5 mg, 3 times a week) against post-

menopausal (natural or oophorectomized)

con-

trols without exogenous hormones, and a group

of patients postmenopausal

(natural or sur-

gical) who for various reasons have had inter-

mittent hormone supplementation.

These pa-

tients were usually with oophorectomy

done

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

3.00

2.75

2.50

2.25

2.00
usALo

1.75

I 38

I

1.98

ain

POSTMENOPAUSAL

1,50

WiTH HORMONES

fRREGULAR

POSTMENOPAUSAL WITHOUT HORMONES

(30 patients)

1.25

(69 patients)

FIGURE L--Bone-density

evaluation

from January

17,

1964 to January

27, 1965, expressed

as linear co-

efficients of absorption.

at other institutions who, after an interval of

time postoophorectomy,

have been placed on

stilbestrol or, in a few instances, patients in whom stilbestrol has been discontinued.

The results of this study are shown in table I, which gives the linear coefficients of absorption for cortical bone (_ób) and over all bone

TABLE I.--Bone-Density

Evaluations

(From Jan. 17, 196 /_to Jan. _7, 1965)

Group sal

1--Premenopau-

normal

females

(25 patients). Group 2--Postmeno-

pausal females with-

out hormones

(69

patients).

Group 3--Postmeno-

pausal females

with

hormones

(71

patients).

Group 2-3--Postmenopausal females with

hormones

for irregu-

lar time periods (30

patients).

_b =2.83 -t- 0.24 cm -1 tb = 2.22 =t:0.19 cm-'
_b= 2.64 :t=0.33 cm -_ tb = 1.78 -t- 0.33 cm -1

_b=2.75▒

0.20 cm -_

_tb = 1.98 -t- 0.26 cm -_

_b=2.70

▒ 0.22 cm -_

_tb: 1.90 =t=0.27 cm -I

ESTROGENS

AND POSTMENOPAUSAL

0STEOPOHOSIS

165

(_tb)- The linear coefficient of absorption for postmenopausal (oophorectomized patients) is 1.98___0.26 cm -1 as compared to 1.78___0.33 em -z for the control group (patients postoophoreetomy or postmenopausal without added hormones). The group of patients with intermittent supplemental hormones was 1.90___09.7 em-z. The standard deviation given is that of the individual of the group and does not indicate the standard deviation of the mean. _
one would anticipate, there is a wide range of values in each group. These patients were not selected because they were clinically osteoporotic but were placed on stilbestrol prophylactically. The data is shown here on the bar graph (fig. 1) and includes all the patients. Table II gives the linear coefficients of absorption of the patients grouped in 5-year intervals postmenopause. The standard deviation of an individual
in each group is given and also the standard error of the mean. The data are depicted in this line graph (fig. 2) in which the patients are grouped according to years postmenopause.
There is, with aging, a gradual decrease in the

2.25
_.00 5 Z
1.75
:L

17 WITHOUT HORMONES O WITH HORMONES

1.5o

1.25
_'_0'o3_

01_5

5_10

10II5

YEARS POST MENOPAUSE

2._Absorption

coefficient menopause.

versus

I 15-_0
years 13,eel-

"7

Fi6vm_ 3.---Overall of patient, from

bone density coefficients

versus age

December,

1963 to July 16, 1964.

linear coefficient of absorption in the controls

without harmone supplementation.

Here the

patients have been grouped into 5-year incre-

ments postmenopause and are compared with

the patients on stilbestrol. These patients with the additional hormone also have a decrease in

the linear coefficient of absorption with increas-

ing years postmenopause, but not to the same

degree as the controls, and the close correlation

of the two groups, zero to 5 years postmeno-

pausal, is striking. The data on part of these

patients are shown on this scatter graph (fig. 3)

where, in addition, the patients with stilbestrol

and without are compared to a group of pre-

menopausal females where the linear coefficient

of absorption (jtttb) is 2.22+---0.19 era-1. There is some overlap in the groups as one would antici-

pate, Out the difference between the three groups is evident.

The linear coefficient of cortical bone (_ó_) of this same group of patients on semilog scale (fig. 4) results in a straight line. The measurement of the cortical bone thickness is not as accurate as the measurement of total bone. Measurements of bone thickness were made with

a magnifying lens with a built-in scale.

166

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Group

TABLE II.--Bone-De_ity

(January

17_ 1964 through

Data Sum/mary

January

27, 1965)

(Std. error

Number of

ptb

(Std. dev.) _ of mean)

p_b

patients

]_

1

25

[] _ 0-20

52

0-5

15

5-10

16

2 10-15

15

2 15-20

6

(D a 0-0

72

s 0-5

18

s 5-10

32

3 10-15

18

15-20

4

2. 22
1.79 2. 00 1.68 1.76 1.65
1.98 1. 99 2. 03 1.91 1.78

▒0. 19
▒ . 33 ▒ . 32 ▒ . 35 ▒ . 31 ▒ . 16
4- . 26 4- . 18 ▒ . 30 ▒ . 24 ▒ . 37

All # and _ in cm-X. Subnumbers referto number of years since menopause.

▒0. 04
▒ . 05 4- . 08 4- . 09 4- . 08 4- . 06
4- . 03 4- . 04 4- . 05 ▒ . 06 4- . 18

2. 83
2. 66 2. 73 2. 53 2. 78 2. 53
2. 74 2. 75 2. 72 2. 74 2. 86

4- . 32 4- . 24 4- . 30 4- . 34 4- . 41
4- . 20 4- . 22 4- . 24 ▒ . 19 4- . 21

▒ . 04 ▒ . 06 ▒ . 07 4- . 09 5= . 16
▒ . 02 4- . 05 4- . 04 4- . 04 ▒ .11

To test for the equality of two distributions

of patients,

we have used the two-sample

test

with unequal variances

as developed

by Welch

(Brownlee,

1960).

In this test we assume we

have two independent

samples from normal dis-

tributions

with means and sampled variances.

.6 ......................................

*% prle _ mancipau_

.4 I .............

D..........

Q

Q ▒I

o

i

.Oe,oflO

o

.3

!

!

_,0%,*

,

...........o..0.|.-".B_I.░.s'."o....Ę

ooo

Ę Ę o--81;: S I"

Ę

o

.I .Io

Ę 15

.20

-25

.30

-35

AO

ob + cd, CortiCO| Bone Thickness in cm,

FIGURE 4.--I_g I/Io versus cortical bone size, from December 1963 to July 16, 1964.

We wish to test the null hypothesis

that these

means are equal. From figure 2 we see that the

absorption

coefficient

for the cases with and

without

exogenous

hormone

for the 0-5-year

postmenopausal

group are essentially

the same.

t{owever_

for the 5-10-year

postmenopausal

group, the odds against the two mean values be-

ing the same are greater than 99 to 1. For the

10-15o and the 15-20-year

groups, the statisti-

cal differences

are far smaller.

The number of

patients

in the 15-20-year

postmenopausal

group are quite small, and it may not be possi-

ble to evaluate further this group at this time.

CONCLUSION

The results of our study indicate that:

1, There is a gradual loss of bone mass with

increasing

age (a decrease in the linear coeffi-

cient of absorption

of total bone).

2. The linear coefficient of absorption

of corti-

cal bone is relatively

unchanged.

This sup-

ports the concept that osteoporotic

bone is of the

same composition

as normal bone.

3. Comparison

of three groups of patients

postmenopausal

demonstrates

retardation

of

aging (osteoporosis)

in patients with exogenous

estrogens.

ESTROGENS

AND POSTMENOPAUSAL

REFERENCE

BROWNLEE, K. A. : Statistical

Theory and Methodology

Wiley and Sons, New York, 1960, 235 pp.

0STEOPOR_SIS in Science and Engineering.

John

167

COMMENTS

Dr. LANZL Dr. Strandjord

has shown the standard

de._.a_on dividuais.

__._nming a normal distribution

of tho_ in-

You notice some overlapping

in these group_

How do you treat these data? We have taken two

postmenopausal

situations

with and without hormones

and broken them down into 5 year intervals.

These

two are quite close together for the first 5 years after

menopause.

Is there a meaningful

difference

there-

after?

We have calculated

the standard

deviation of

the mean and then evaluated the significance

of mean,

but by the test of Welch.

This is a two-sample

test

with unequal variance.

In Welch's test one asks the

null hypothesis.

If you were to repeat this experiment

with this number, what is the probability

that these

two would be the same?

It turns out, according to this

test, that the odds are about 99 to 100 that you would

not get these two means to overlap.

Therefore,

we

conclude that this is a meaningful

difference.

Dr. Strandjord

asked me to summarize

this last

paper.

First, there is a gradual loss of bone mass with

increasing

age, a decrease

in the linear coefficient

ab-

sorption of total bone. Second, the linear coefficient

absorption

of cortical

bone is relatively

unchanged.

Third, comparison

of three groups of postmenopausal

patients

demonstrates

retardation

of aging (osteopo-

rosis) in the patients

with exogenous

estrogens_

Dr. NORDIN. Postmenopausal

osteoperosis,

we would

all agree, is probably a phenomenon

of trabecular

bone.

It is something

that happens at the end of the fall with

age. The compact bone is much less significantly

as-

sociated with the menopause

than the trabecular

bone.

Dr. HURXTHAL. In 107 postmenopausal

women out of

a series of 400 random controls, we found no difference

from the mean.

Furthermore,

in 11 castrates

30 years' duration we still found no difference.

of over

Dr. _'ORDIN. In what bone?

Dr. HURXTHAL. In L-3. Also, in 50 patients

with

osteoporosis,

that is, patients with symptomatic

osteo-

porosis or patients

exhibiting

a marked

decrease

in

density by X-ray, the density from zero to 4 years after

the menopause

was exactly the same as the density

from 30 years after.

I figured that the people who

had low densities 4 years after the menopause

had the

low density before the menopause

began.

Therefore,

the "postmenopausal"

osteoporosis

was present before

the menopause.

I agree with Dr. Arnold that under

this theory you get in the end what you start out with.

ib7
a

Calcium Loss Studies During Human Bed Rest."
A Preliminary Report

PAr.a.mas BEERY M_cx Nelda Childers Stark Laboratory Texas Woman's University

During the past 2 years, our team of research workers at the Texas Woman's University has

been conducting an investigation

on the effects

of bed rest immobilization

on metabolic and

skeletal changes in healthy adult males. Seven-

teen men, screened for physical and psycholog-

ical responses to batteries of examinations

and

tests, have cooperated in this investigation,

which includes metabolic studies and studies of

bone mass changes resulting from continuous

bed rest for designated periods of time. This

is a brief, preliminary report.

Five 14-day units of the investigation

and

one 30-day unit have been completed, although

all data have not been analyzed.

One 30-day

bed rest unit currently is in progress.

Each

bed rest period has been preceded by an ambu-

latory preconditioning

period and has been fol-

lowed by an ambulatory period of recondition-

ing. The preconditioning,

the bed rest, and the

reconditioning

periods combined are designated

as constituting one bed rest unit. When an am-

bulatory period is investigated for comparison

with a bed rest period involving the same level

of calcium, preconditioning

and reconditioning

periods also precede and follow the ambulatory

period under consideration.

SCREENING

THE SUBJECTS

The subjects are given preliminary interviews

by the director of the laboratory;

and if they

show no apparent undesirable characteristics

or

situations which might interfere with their par-

ticipation in the project, they are sent to the

Medical-Surgical

Clinic in Denton where they

are examined by two internists on the clinic staff

who also are Visiting Professors at the Nelda

Childers Stark Laboratories

of the Texas

Woman's University.

The preliminary

inations consist of the following:

exam-

1. A thorough medical examination which in-

cludes a review of: eye, ear, nos% and

throat systems; chest and gastrointestinal

systems; and genitourinary well as a full examination

systems_ as of thyroid,

heart (with an accompanying electrocardi-

ogram), lungs, abdomen, genitalia, rectun_

prostate, and reflexes.

2. Chest X-ray of the lungs and heart, diag-

nosed by the Visiting TWU research staff.

Radiologist

on the

3. Clinical laboratory tests which include the

complete hematological

series; the com-

plete fasting blood sugar series; and a

urinalysis series.

In order to secure information

about their

probable 'behavior during their participation

in

the study, the subjects also are given a neuro-

psychiatric

examination

at the clinic and

psychological

tests at the Texas Woman;s

University.

GENERAL

PLAN

INVESTIGATION

OF THE

The men are kept at bed rest continuously for designated periods of time on planned diets, with calcium the chief dietary variable. While
169

170

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

they are ambulatory, they are assigned seden..tary tasks for 8 hours daily in the various lab-

oratories of the TWU Research Institute, with

their hours of sleep and other activities

regulated as nearly as possible.

While at bed rest, the men use only one pil-

low, and they remain recumbent throughout

this phase of the study. They are bathed in

bed, with their teeth brushed by trained male

orderlies. All hygienic needs are cared for by

the orderlies.

They are spoon-fed by the

dietitians on the project.

They pass the time by watching their respec-

tive hospital television sets equipped with ear

phones

and by reading

through

glasses

equipped with prismatic the men is not restricted.

lenses. Arm motion in

EXPERIMENTAL

DIETS

The daily levels of calcium fed at the differ-

ent 14-day periods have included 0.5 gram, 0.7 gram, 1.0 gram, 1.5 grams, and 2.0 grams, respectively. The 30-day bed rest unit, which has been completed, provided 2.0 grams of calcium per day, while the 30-day unit currently in progress provides 1 gram daily. The calcium levels have not been maintained in the order

given here. Before any one bed rest is begun,
the men are equilibrated with respect to bone mass of the central os calcis section on the diet

which contains 1.5 grams of calcium per day, unless they are going on to a unit which includes 2.0 grams of calcium daily, in which case this calcium level is maintained throughout the unit.
The phosphorus in each unit is provided so that the Ca : P ratio falls within the 2 : 1 to 1 : 2

range suggested by Cantarow and Shepartz (1962), while not interfering with the protein provision. The remainder of the diet is held as

closely as possible throughout the study to the

following:

2400 calories, 90-100 grams of pro-

tein, 18-20 milligrams of iron, 10,000 Interna-

tional Units of vitamin A equivalency (including preformed vitamin A and provitamin A),

400 International

Units of vitamin D, 100-150

milligrams of ascorbic acid, and minima of 1.6

milligrams of thiamine, 1.8 milligrams of ribo-

flavin, and 21 milligrams of niacin per day. A

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

minimum of 950 milligrams of magnesium is"

supplied daily, in line with the suggestion by

Wohl and Goodhart (1960).

The diets are designed with respect to the

types of foods selected and their preparation

so

as to fall in the low residue category.

New

cooperators in the study are informed about the

effects of the low residue diet before they begin

so that they will not worry about their probable infrequency of defecation.

Management of the diets is in the hands of a

head dietitian who is certified by the American

Dietetics Association and who is assisted by two

other experienced dietitians.

When the series

of studies began, a basic diet was prepared which can be altered to accommodate the dif-

ferent levels of calcium. For each calcium level, three master menus have been prepared which are rotated and which allow for limited substi-

tutions within foods of the same type in order

to avoid monotony.

At each meal the same quantity of the solid

and liquid foods are given to each subject, with

the solid foods weighed on a calibrated gram

balance and the liquids measured in a calibrated

volumetric

container.

The subjects are en-

couraged to consume all foods but are not forced

to do so. Rejected food is weighed and the

results entered into the subject's record. Whether the subjects are ambulatory or at
bed rest, they are given 8 to 10 eight-ounce portions of water or of nonmilk liquids on a schedule throughout the day and early evening.
The calcium and phosphorus content of each food in each meal is determined by laboratory analysis, and the provisions of other nutrients are calculated from standard food composition tables by a program established in the TWU Data Processing Center.

TESTS MADE ON EXPERIMENTAL

SUBJECTS

Table I outlines the units of the bed rest im-

mobilization study to date and the subjects par-

ticipating in each subdivision.

It will be noted

that three men have taken part in three units,

four men in two units, and the remainder in one unit of the series to date. Some of those in

.
Ę TABLE I.--Units
Unit

CALCIUM

LOSS STUDIES

DURING HIYMAN BED REST

171

of the Bed Rest and Corresponding An_buI_tory Phases of the Incestigation

Level of daily calcium provided

Length of the bed rest

Participating subjects in bed rest and corresponding ambulatory periods

1 .................. 2 ..................

4 .................. 5 ..................
6 and

7 ............

1.5 grams ...........

14 days .............

0.7 gram ...........

14 days ............

2.0 grams ...........

14days ............

0.5 gram ...........

14 days ............

2.0 grams ...........

30 days ............

1.0 gram ...............................

Begin as 14-day unit, but continued without

change of any kind as a 30-day unit

Subjects Subjects Subjects Subjects Subjects Subjects

A, B, D, E. A, B, D, E. A, D, G, H. G, H, J, K, L. G, L, M, N, O. P, Q, R, S, T.

Units 5, 6, and 7 will participate in a forthcoming unit. Table II gives the tests made on the subjects in each unit and the frequency with which they are administered.
Cardiovascular tests have been added by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the 30-day bed rest unit now in progress as well as to the 30-day ambulatory period which preceded and to the 30-day ambulatory period which will follow this bed rest period.

PP_IdMINARY

REPORT ON FINDINGS

Calcium Balance
In spite of metabolic differences, all subjects were in calcium balance during the equilibration period during which they were fed 1.5 or 2.0 grams of calcium daily, depending upon the level of calcium to be fed during bed rest. On the other hand, all subjects were in negative balance to a minor or major degree during all

TABLE II.--Tests
Unit

Administered

to the Subjects During the Specified Units of the Investigation

Test

Frequency of test

1, 2, and 3 ......
4 ..............
5 ..............
6 and 7 ........

Blood tests for hematology;

plasma aseorbic

acid,

vitamin A, carotene,

and phosphorus;

serum cal-

cium, acid and alkaline phosphatase,

total protein,

albumin,

and cholesterol;

and urinary tests for

thiamine,

riboflavin,

and N'Methylnicotinamide.

Weekly.

Urinary and fecal tests for calcium and phosphorus__

Daily.

Roentgenogram_

of lateral _s calcis ................

Daily during bed rest, daily or

every other ambulation.

day during

Roentgenogranms phalanx 5-2.

of the hand with emphasis

on Weekly.

Tests the same as for Units 1 to 3 except that a Weekly. lateral view of the patella was added.

Tests the same as for 4 except that urinary tests for

nitrogen,

ereatine, and creatinine

were added.

Daffy.

Tests the same as for 5 except that urinary tests for

17 keto-steroids

and 17 cortico-steroids

were added.

Daffy.

792-965 _12

172
TABLE III.--Data
Bed rest unit

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

.

on Calcium

Consumption, Respective

Calcium Excretion, Bed Rest Periods

and Calcium Balance During

Mean
calcium
planned daily
(grams)

Mean
calcium consumed
daily (grams)

Mean calcium excreted daily (grams)

Urinary

Fecal

Total

Mean calcium balance
(grams)

Data for ambulatory
oontrol period for comparison
(grams)

(1) 14-day:

Subject Subject

A .......... B ..........

Subject Subject

D .......... E ..........

(2) 14-day: Subject A .......... Subject B .......... Subject D .......... Subject E ..........

(3) 14-day:

Subject
Subject Subjeet

D ..........
GA .......... I-I ..........

(4) 14 day: Subject G .......... Subject H .......... Subject J ........... Subject K .......... Subject L ..........

(5) 30-day: Subject G .......... Subject L .......... Subject M .......... Subject N .......... Subject O ..........

(6) 14-day ............

(7) 30-day ...........

1. 500

1. 457 1. 316 1.526 1. 484

424 0. 406 0. 354 0. 190

1. 232 1. 065 1.277 1.529

1. 656 1. 472 1.631 1.719

--0. 199 --0.156 --0. 105 --0.235

░+_ 394 +0.008 --0.018 +0. 196

O. 700

0. 659 0. 636
686 0. 675

0. 411 0. 425 0.318 0. 135

602 541 0.653 0. 824

1.013 0.966 0.971 0.959

--_ 354 --0. 330 --0. 285 --0.284

.-{-& 111 -}-_ 021 +_ 095 +_ 133

2. 000 I
O. 500

2. 017 2.038 2. 084 1. 910
0. 466 0. 431 0.395 0. 431 0. 436

460 0. 380
406 325
260 0.257 0. 245 0. 212 0.178

1. 814 1.978 1.971 1. 790
722 0. 801 0. 672
726 1.071

2.274 2.358 2.377 2. 115

--0. 257 --0. 320 --0.293 --0.205

b -}-_ 430 +_425 -_ 260 +0.182

O. 982 1. 058 0. 917
928 1.249

--0.516 --0. 627 --0.522 --_ 507 --0. 813

a+0. 376 +o. 221 +o. 122 +o. 249 +0. 145

2. 000
1. 000 1. 000

1. 876 2. 033 1. 896 2.062 2. 192

0. 451 322
0. 326 0.478 0. 422

1. 632 1. 868 1.717 1. 694 1.976

2.083 2.190 2. 040 2 172 2.398

Data not yet analyzed. This unit of the study not yet completed.

--0.207 --0. 157 --_ 144 --0. 110 --0. 206

+0. 464 -}-_ 353 +0. 546 +_ 263 +0. 287

o Calcium b Calcium

intake intake

level 1.5 grams/day level 2.0 grams/day

during during

control

ambulation

ambulation

period.

period.

bed rest periods, as determined by a comparison of the intake and outgo of this element, the latter in urine and feces. The calcium tests were

made in triplicate by trained biochemists. Table III summarizes the data on calcium

consumption,

calcium excretion, and calcium

balance for the bed rest immobilization

units

of the investigation

for which the analyses have

been completed, together with the balance sta-

tus when the subjects were ambulatory on the

equilibration

levels of calcium intake. All bal-

ance data in the table are given as average

grams per day during the period specified.

The table shows that the degree of negative

balance varied between subjects for each bed

rest level of dietary calcium, although there

was a general relationship between the level of

calcium intake and the extent of the negative

C_

LOSS STUDIES

DURING HUMAN

BED REST

173

balance. The feces are shown to change somewhat more widely than the urine in calcium excretion at different levels of calcium intake.
The highest degree of negative calcium balance appeared in the 14-day bed rest period during which only 0.5 gram of calcium was provided, with somewhat less than this amount of calcium consumed. Rejection of bread with its content of dried milk powder was a major reason for the lowerpd cale.ium intake of this
group.
Calcium Consumption and Excretion Data
in Earlier Investigations
Of major investigations in which intake and outgo of calcium are reported, the following may be cited.
In 1945, Howard et. al. of the Johns Hopkins Hospital in.vestigated the effect of prolonged bed rest on 13 male subjects, varying in ages from 14 to 64 years, who had been hospitalized because of femoral or tibial fractures. Four other patients were studied before and after femoral osteotomy. All were in a good state of nutrition, and none manifested any abnormalities except those for which they were hospitalized. The patients were immobilized in extensive casts. Analyses of urinary calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen were made as well as various blood tests.
After immobilization, urinary calcium excretion rose steadily on constant diets as did the quantity of phosphorus in the urine. The amount of urinary calcium excreted on dietary intakes of 2.0 grams per day ranged from 495 to 600 milligrams. Values for calcium in the feces were not reported, and hence calcium balance status could not be calculated.
Two reports were issued in 1948 and 1949 from the Department of Medicine of Cornell Medical College, the New York Hospital, and the Russell Sage Institute of Pathology on the results of immobilizing healthy subjects in terms of various metabolic and physiologic functions. The first of these, reported by Deitrick et al. (1948), involved four healthy young men (who participated in a preliminary control period of 6 to 8 weeks, an immobilization period of 6 weeks for one pair and 7 for the other, and a

recovery period of 4 weeks for one and 6 for the other. During the immobilization period the men were placed in bivalved casts extending from the umbilicus to the toes. They remained in these casts constantly throughout the immobilization period except for the use of the bedpan and for ergometer and tilt table test_ The ergometer and tilt t_sts were performed periodically during the immobilization period. The tLme during which the men were ..tree of the casts averaged 30 to 40 minutes daily.
Immobilization brought about a prompt increase both in urinary and fecal calcium, which continued and reached a maximal peak at 4 to 6 weeks. Whedon (1960) later called attention to the similarity of the pattern of calcium excretion in this study with that seen by Howard et al. (1943), cited above. Calcium excretion (urinary and fecal) recovered slowly and continued to show values greater than the control period for 3 week_
The second study made by these investigators was reported by Whedon et al. (1949). They were concerned with measures which might improve the disadvantageous outcomes of long immobilization. As one means of reducing the ill effects of long confinement to bed, the Sanders slowly oscillating bed was investigated with three normal healthy young men who had taken part in the previous immobilization study with fixed beds. Thus the metabolic and physiologic data from the former study could serve as a control for this study.
Urinary calcium in this study increased less rapidly than in the fixed-bed experiment. For all three subjects the maximum urinary excretion for a 3- to 4-day pooled specimen ranged from 155 to 458 rag. per day, with an average maximum of 311 rag. This is to be contrasted with the maximum urinary calcium excretion of the same three subjects in the fixed-bed ex-
periment of 140 to 594 mg, with an average maximum of 362 mg. During the recovery phase following immobilization in the oscillating bed, calcium excretion decreased toward control levels more rapdily than it did in the fixed-bed study.
In a study by Whedon and Shorr (1957), 11 subjects were studied who were the victims

174

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

of the seriously immobilizing disease, acute an-

terior poliomyelitis.

Maximal negative calcium

balance occurred on the average of 9 weeks

after onset and ranged from -0.420 to -0.683

gram per day among seven patients, with a

mean of -0.540 gram per day. Negative cal-

cium balance continued for an average of 7

months, with positive balance regained approx-

imately after patients began to stand on

their feet. Phosphorus excretion_ on the other

hand, increased very promptly, in contrast with

calcium excretion, with the increase entirely in

the urinary sample. Maximal phosphorus

in

the urine ranged between 1.07 and 2.13 grams

per day, based on a 8-day average. Return to

a positive phosphorus balance on diets provid-

ing from 1.35 to 1.66 grams daily varied from

8 to 91/2 months after onset of the disease.

A study of cardiodynamic

and metabolic

effects of prolonged bed rest conducted at

Lankenau

Hospital,

Philadelphia,

was pub-

lished by Birkhead et al. (1963). The study

was sponsored by the 6570th Aerospace Medical

Research Laboratories,

Wright-Patterson

Air

Force Base, Ohio.

In this investigation, four healthy men served

as the subjects of the study. The men were admitted to the Metabolic Ward of the hospital

3 weeks before the beginning of the bed rest

period, with the first part of the preliminary

period concerned with initial examinations and

tests, and the last 18 days devoted to physical

training.

The bed rest period covered 42 days,

followed by an 18-day retraining period. Dur-

ing the bed rest phase of the study, the only

activity allowed the men was that of arms and

legs.

During the study the subjects were on a

weighed diet of 2523 calories--77 grams of pro-

tein, 74 grams of fat, 385 grams of carbohy-

drate, and 1.724 grams of calcium. Analyses

of the diet for calcium and nitrogen were made

at frequent intervals.

The diet consisted pri-

marily of a liquid formula.

The most marked change found during bed rest included definite increases in excretion of

calcium and phosphorus.

In some cases the

urinary excretion of calcium more than doubled,

and the increase began during the first 6 days in bed.

In a bed rest study conducted at the Texas

Institute of Rehabilitation

and Research, Texas

Medical Center, Houston, reported by Vogt et

al. (1965) to the National Aeronautics

and

Space Administration,

which had sponsored the

project, results of bone mass measurements

as

detemnined by radiographic

densitometry

and

calcium and phosphorus balance trials were re-

ported. According to the experimental

design

of the study, six healthy young men, 21 to 84

years old, participated

in two 14-day bed rest

periods which differed only in the provision of

controlled isometric exercise during the second

period.

After the bed rest period began, increases in

calcium and phosphorous

losses, both in urine

and feces, were experienced.

With a diet which

provided approximately

1.0 gram of calcuim per

day, mean negative calcium balance levels were

found for all of the participants.

When the

same men engaged in a second bed rest period

during which controlled isometric exercise was

taken at defined times per day, the output of calcium tended to be somewhat lower than was

the case when the men were at bed rest without

the exercise. Moreover,

the determinations

which were made on these men by the T_VU

method of radiographic

densitometry

showed

greater conservation of bone during the bed rest period when isometric exercise was taken in bed than during the previous bed rest period when no exercise was taken.

Distribution

of Calcium Between and Feces

Urine

This investigatiou

has shown to this point

that the percentage of calcium excreted in the

feces is far higher than that excreted in the

urine, which is consistent with the findings of

other investigators.

This is contrary to the

situation with phosphorus, which is excreted in

fat" larger percentages in urine than in feces.

Although the distribution of calcium between

feces and urine was found to vary with indi-

vidual men, the percentages of calcium in the

urine in these studies have been highest when

CALCIUM

LOSS STUDIES

DURING

HUMAN

BED REST

175

TABLE IV--Per Cent Distribution of Excreted Calcium Between Urine and Feces

PART A. EXCRETION

LEVELS

DURING

BED REST

Percent

of excreted

calcium

Sub_e_

Subject Subject Subject Subject

A ........................ B ........................ D ........................ E .........................

PART

Bed rest 2 on lowest dietary

calcium

level

(0.7 gram]day)

Bed rest 1 on intermediate

dietary

calcium

level

(1.5 grams/day)

Urine
l _4o..6 !
i
44_0 32 8
14.1

Feces
9.4
56.0 67. 2 8_9

Urine
2._i 6 27. 6 21. 7 11. 1

Feoas
7& 4 72. 4 78. 3 88.9

t

B. EXCRETION

LEVELS

DURING

AMBULATION

Bed rest 3 on highest

dietary

calciLlm level

(2.0 grams/day)

Urine

Feces

20.2 X
16. 1 X

79. 8 X
83. 9 X

Percent of excreted calcium

Subjects

Ambulatory period on lowest Ambulatory period on inter- Ambulatory period on high-

dietary calcium level

mediate dietary calcium level [ est dietary calcium level

(0.7 gram]day)

(1.5 grams]day)

(2.0 grams/day)

Urine

Feces

Urine

Feces

Urine

Feces

Subject Subject Subject Subject

A ......................... B ......................... D ........................ E .........................

42.8 52. 4 23. 4
9.3

57. 1 47. 6 76. 6 90.7

34_ 3 24_ 7 17. 3
7. 8

65. 7 75. 3 82_ 7 9Z 2

31.7 X
17. 0 X

6& 3 X
83_ 0 X

the dietary calcium was lowest, intermediate at

intermediate levels of dietary calcium, and low-

est on the highest calcium intake level, whether

the men were at bed rest or ambulatory.

This is

mainly the result of the more prominent changes in the level of calcium in the feces, which re-

fleeted dietary calcium changes.
Tabel IV summarizes the comparison of calcium levels in feces and urine for the men who

participated

in the first three bed rest unit_

Trends in Bone Mass Changes
The change of bone mass in the central section of the os calcis generally followed the level of calcium in the diet, although it is understood that this one section of one bone cannot represent what is happening to the entire skeleton. The ranges of bone mass loss as represented by this central section of the os eMeis, which is the width of the scanning beam (1.3 ram.), from a posterior to an anterior landmark in the os calcis

were the following for the specified bed rest periods which haxe been completed.

Bed rest unit

Duration of unit
Day_
14 14 14 14 30

Level

of

dietary

cal-

cium (grams)

Range of bone mass change in os caleis section

Percent

1.5

--4.5 to --6.7

.7

--7.4 to --9.8

2.0

--3.0 to --6.5

.5

-- 10.6 to -- 14.0

2.0

--3.5 to --7.4

It is noteworthy that the group which exhibited the highest level of negative calcium balance (unit 4 on 0.5 gram calcium offered, with a mean of 0.432 gram consumed) also experienced the highest loss of bone mass in the central os caleis section during a 14-day bed rest period. The high negative calcium balance values, which ranged from -0.507 to -0.813, as shown in

176

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

table III, are consistent with the high percent-

ages of bone mass loss, as shown above. Changes in the bone mass of finger-phalanx
5-2, determined by scanning cross sections 1 nun apart throughout the length of this bone, were minor during all 14-day bed rest immobilization periods. During the 30-day bed rest unit which is completed, however, over-all losses in bone mass in this anatomical site ranged from

-7.6 to -11.9%.

Most of the losses in bone

mass in this position occurred during the last

half of the 30-day bed rest period.

Ohanges in bone mass of the patella are being

measured at the present time, with no report on

the effect of bed rest immobilization

on the

integrity time.

of this bone completed

at the present

Changes in Serum Calcium During Bed Rest

Changes in serum calcium have been very slight during all of the bed rest immobilization

periods which have been completed to date. Even during the 14-day bed rest period when only 0.5 gram calcium was offered with a mean slightly below this level consumed, serum calcium levels remained relatively constant, as seen

in the following summarization

:

Serum calcium (rag per 100 ml

Serum.)

Initial

Final

Subject Subject Subject Subject Subject

G ............................ H ........................... J ............................ K ........................... L ............................

11.5 10. 3 10. 7 10. 1 11.2

11.3 10. 3 10. 6 10. 7 10. 5

SUMMARY

Our studies on calcium loss during human bed rest involve seven bed rest periods with four

to five healthy adult males participating

in

each bed rest unit. Each bed rest unit involves

a preconditioning

and a reconditioning

ambu-

latory period and collateral ambulatory peri-

ods during which the same level of calcium is fed as during the bed rest phase. As a part of

the experimental

ambulatory unit, the subjects

Ę ]so were preconditioned

and reconditioned.

Results of the bed rest and ambulatory phases

of the investigation

are reported in terms of

dietary balance calculations,

changes in bone

mass in c_rtain anatomical sites as determined

by radiographic

bone densitometry,

in certain blood values.

and changes

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is deeply indebted to all members of the staff of t,lm Nelda C hildeI-s Stark Labora-

tory for Human Nutrition Research for their

cooperation

in the bed rest and ambulation

studies which have been described very briefly

in this report. Especial thanks are due those

who have charge of various lines of work,

namely, Dr. Roy E. Beauchene (through Au-

gust 31, 1964); Dr. Ralph E. Pyke; Dr. Elsa

Arcienegas Klapper ; Walter W. Gilchrist; John

Bateman; Dr. Betty B. Alford; B. J. Stover;

W. Grady Dozier; and Dr. Ruth Gauldin.

REFERENCES

BIRKHEAD, N. C. ; BLIZZARD, J. J. ; DALY, J. W. ; HAUPT, G. J. ; ISSEKUTZ, B., Jr. ; MYEas,

R. N. ; and RODAHL, K. : (Monitored

by Paul LaChance),

Cardiodynamic

and Metabolic

Effects of Prolonged Bed Rest, Technical

Documentary

Report No. AMRL-TDR_-67

(1963) Biomedical

Laboratory,

Air Force System Command,

Wright-Patterson

Air

Force Base, Ohio, 1963.

CANTAROW,

ABRAHAM;

Co., Philadelphia,

and 1962.

SHEPARTZ,

BERNARD: Biochemistry,

Third ed., W. B. Saunders

DEITRICK, JOHN E. ; WI-IEDON, G. DONALD; and SHIOnR, EPHRAIM : The Effects of Immobiliza-

tion Upon Various vol. 4, 1948, p. 3.

Metabolic

and Physiologic

Functions

of Normal Man. Am. J. Med.,

CALCIUM

LOSS STUDIES

DURING

HUMAN

BED R_EST

HowA1w, JoH_ EA_ER; PAZSON. WŻL_H;

add BIGttAM, BOY S.: Studies

on Patients

Convalescing

from Fracture

: III. The Urinary Excretion

of Calcium and Phosphorus.

Johns Hopkins Hosp. Bull., vol. 77, 1945, p. _91.

VoGT, F. B. ; MACK, P. B. ; BZASL_, W. G. ; SPENCER, W. A. ; CARDUS, D. ; and VALBONNA,

C. : The Effect of Bedrest on Various Parametexs

of Physiological

Function

: Part XII,

The Effect of Bedrest

on Bone Mass and Calcium Balance.

Prepared under Contract

No. NAS 9-1461 by Texas Institute

for Rehabilitation

and Research,

Houston,

Texas,

for National Aeronautics

and Space Administration

(April 1965).

WHEDON,

G. DONALD : Osteoporois

: Atrophy of Disuse, Chap. 4 of Bone as a Tissue, pp.

67-82, McGraw-Hill

Book Co., Inc., 1960.

WH_ON,

G. DONALD ; DEz'rRIOK, JOHN E. ; aDd SHORR, EPHRAIM : Modification

of the Effects

of !mmnhili_tion

u_n Metabolic

and Physiolo_e

Flmetions

of Normal Mort by the

Use of an Oscillating

Bed. Am. J. Med., vol. 6, 1949, p. 68&

WHZDO_, G. DONALD; and SHORR, EPHRAZH : Metabolic

Studies in Paralytic

Acute Anterior

Poliomyelitis

II. Alterations

in Calcium and Phosphorus

Metabolism.

J. Clin. Invest.,

vol. 73, 1957, p. 966.

WOHL,

MICHAEL G. ; and (_0ODHART,

Lea add Febiger,

Philadelphia,

ROBERT S. : Modern Nutrition

in Health

1960; based on the report by Tibbetts,

and Disease.

Dorothy

M.,

and Aub, Joseph C. : Magnesium

Metabolism

in Health and Disease:

I. The Magnesimn

and Calcium

Excretion

of Normal Individuals.

J. Clin. Invest., vol. 16, 1937, p. 491.

177

Regression Curves for Representative Urinary Calcium
and Bone Mass Values

ELS^ ARc_

IO._vEa am)

P,,._,'-.-,_.- Br_.Y M^c_:

Texas Woman's University

Regression curves are presented as calculated

and plotted by the IBM 1620 Computer from

urinary calcium excretion and bone mass data obtained from men in the TWU bed rest and

collateral ambulation studie_ Dr. Klapper has

based her Ph.D. research problem on the units

of this overall investigation, which included the

feeding of 0.7, 1.5, and 2.0 grams of calcium,

respecVively, during three bed rest and three

corresponding

ambulatory

periods to four

healthy adult male subjects shown in the pre-

vious report as belonging to Bed Rest Units 1,

2, and 3. Three figures have been chosen to

illustrate how the regression curve can serve

to show trends in bone mass change and change

in urinary excretion of calcium.

FIRST ORDER REGRESSION

PLOTS

First, regression lines have been calculated

and plotted by the computer based on a program

which includes the first order computation

of

least squares, following the formula:

where

:Y=A0+AI(_)

Y is the dependent variable (urinary calcium or bone mass) ;
represents time; A o is the Y intercept; and

A1 is the slope of the regression line.

Simultaneously

with plotting the regression

lines, the data points also were plotted by the

computer.

The following data were obtained

from the machine in each case, as follows: (a)

the variables involved; (b) the range covered

by the plot; (c) the constant, which is the same as the intercept in analytical geometry; (d) the

slope of the curve, which denotes the rate of

change of the factor being plotted; and (e) the

standard error of estimate.

These data have enabled the plots to be

drawn and interpreted.

In each linear plot that

has been produced, the standard error of esti-

mate has indicated that the line which wa_

plotted is a reasonable approximation

change which has occurred factor involved.

with time

of the in the

COMPARISON REGRESSION SENTATIVE THREE BED

OF LINEAR BONE MASS

PLOTS

FOR A REPRE-

S U B J E C T INVOLVING REST PERIODS

Data from Subject A were chosen to show in

figure 1 the slopes of the computer curves dur-

ing three bed rest periods when three different

levels of calcium were being fed.

Upper Plot.--The

first order regression line is

plotted against time for the bone mass measurements in the central section of the os calcis ob-

tained while Subject A was experiencing

14

days of bed rest (Bed Rest Period 2) with the lowest level of dietary calcium consumed (0.7

gram per day planned and a mean of 0.659 gram

consumed).

The data points for the 14 days of

the experiment also are shown in this and sub-

sequent figures. Middle Plot.--The

same data are shown for Sub-

ject A, measured during Bed Rest Period 1

(1.5 grams dietary calcium planned and a mean

of 1.457 grams consumed).

179

180

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

r_ 2.30-2.20-2.10-2.00--

Subtect A
Fourteen-day Bed Rest Period 2 (0.7 gin. calcium/day)
Slope of regression line .... -0. 01193

_ 2.30-0

=i 2.20--
Z '-' 2.10-Z 0
0 r_ 2.00--
I,,-I
rO
oo
0 2.30--
Z
r_
0 2.20--
f_
0
2.10--
r._
Z 0 2.00--
ó1

!HIllr-=- , j

,-.-r.-r---

I li ,'

i: r

_l i

, ii

i

Irl

ill i

i

III ! III
"1░ ,]tlol =, '1_:1,
III
...I.,II1░'░░1..░..

IH !!]

,i░i

'i░' i!o

ii ,i

II

:l

I

iJ
[i,

Fourteen-day Bed Rest Period 1 (1.5 gin. calclum/day) Slope of regression
line .... -0.00627
Fourteen-day Bed Rest Period 3 (2.0 gm. calcium/day) Slope of regression
llne .... -0. 00603

FIGURE L--Comparison

of linear

bone mass regression

plots

rest periods--Subject

for a representative A.

subject

involving

three bed

u

REGRESSION

CURVES FOR URINARY

CALCIUM AND BONE MASS VALUES

181

Lower Plot.--The same data are graphed for Subject A during Bed Rest Period 3 (2.0 grams dietary calcium planned and 2.017 grams consumed).
The slopes of the three regression lines for bone mass of this subject in the anatomical site specified are shown in each of the subdivisions of figure 1.
In order to test the hypothesis that the regr_ion coefficient (A1 in the formula on p. 179) which was obtained during a bed rest or an ambulatory period was equal to some specific value, a "t" test was run to find whether or not this
differed significantly from zero. It was found that, for all 14-day bed rest periods for Subject A, the negative slopes of the regression lines were less than zero by differences which were highly significant in all three cases. The same type of significant differences was found for each bed rest period for the remaining subjects in the three units of the investigation under discussion.

Significant "t" values were found for the other three subjects of the group under discussion not only for the bed rest but also for the ambulatory period when 0.7 gram of calcium per day was fed,
It was not expected that a negative calcium balance would be found for subjects while ambulatory on 0.7 gram of calcium per day. The idea that excessive sweating may have resulted in calcium losses which were not measured was
_u_,,,v,,_d because *_e „;me of year when this unit was accomplished (December) was not conducive to the loss of much perspiration. Since other parts of the study had indicated that, when the feeding of a low dietary calcium level followed immediately after a higher level, the tendency for bone mass to decrease even when the subject was ambulatory may have some bearing here, since this group was equilibrated on a diet containing 1.5 grams of calcium immediately before this ambulatory period began.

COMPARISON

OF FIRST ORDER BONE

MASS REGRESSION PLOTS FOR A SUB-

JECT DURING BED REST AND DURING

AMBULATION

ON A DIET PROVIDING

0.7 GRAM CALCIUM DAILY

Subject B was used as an example to illustrate the comparison of first order bone mass regression lines during 14 days of bed rest and during the same length of time when he was ambulatory, while a diet was consumed which provided 0.7 gram of calcium daily. When this subject was at bed rest with 0.7 gram of calcium provided daily_ he consumed a mean of 0.636 gram. When he was ambulatory on the same diet, he averaged 0.649 gram daily. Therefore his calcium consumption was virtually the same during the two periods.
The computer gave the slope of the regression line in the upper plot of figure 2 as -0.00898, while the middle plot showed the slope of the line to be -0.0(E38. The application of the "t" test showed that the regression line both for the subject's bone mass during bed rest and during ambulation had specific values which differed from zero by statistically significant differences.

REPRESENTATIVE

BONE MASS RE-

G_SSION

PLOT FOR A SUBJECT

AMBULATORY

WHILE IN 1.5 GRAMS

CALCIUM PER DAY

For comparative purposes, a computer plot for Subject B while he was ambulatory on the equilibration diet which provided 1.5 grams of calcium daily is shown in the bottom plot of figure 2. The slope of this regression line was +0.00013, and the application of the "t" test showed that the line did not differ significantly from zero. These findings characterized the linear regTession plots for all four subjects of
this group during an ambulatory period when 1.5 or 2.0 grams of calcium were provided.

EXPONENTIAL

REGRESSION PLOTS

As a means of studying the type of exponential regression curves which could be obtained by means of the IBM 16"20 Computer, semilog curves were plotted for urinary calcium excretion and bone mass change values, with data which seemed to define the results in a manner
which supplemented the linear regression plots.

182
O

DEVELOPMENT

OF METI:tODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRT

I
i.i_iOO.oi' ._i
l

:i
I I :i :i
:1
_i iil,,
i I_
!i

Fourteen-day Rest l_rlod

Bed 2 (0.7

gm. ca Iclum/day)

Slope of regression line .... -0.00898

II

.! i "i░i░░░i░░i░░i!░_ '░OOloo

i!

!ii

I

:i

:I

li !_1

i_

i II

Ambulatory Period

of 14 Days (0.7

gm. calcium/day)

i

z

,, , , ,

i'

,]

Slope of regression

,

,11

line .... -0. 00233

i't░

i░i ....

!

i

II '!'

i Ii

ii

_:1
A_

2.20 Z 0
2.10
2.00
FIGURE 2.--Comparison

i

i

i

:I

mi=,░
i
il
ii _i

Ambulatory Period of 14 Days (1.5 gin. calcium/day)
Slope of regression line .... +0. 00013

J

of linear

bone mass regression

plots for a representative

rest periods--Subject

B.

subject involving

three bed

REGRESSICOURNVES FOR URINARY

CALCIUM AND BONE MASS VALUES

183

The semilog curves were based on the following formula :
Y=Ao+A1 log (z+l) where
Y is the dependent variable; x represents time; Ao is the intercept; A1 is the exponential factor.
Again, data points are computed and plotted by the computer at the same time that the semilog curves are made. The semilog curves are plotted in such a way that the dependent variable data points have the same scale as in the linear plots of the same data. Since the dependent variable ordinate has a linear scale, the least squares semilog curve appears as a log curve. The standard error of estimate, however, is not the normally defined standard error. Rather, it is the antilog of the standard error of log (_+1).

COMPARISON OF A LINEAR COMPUTER

PLOT OF CALCIUM URINARY EXCRE-

TION WITH EXPONENTIAL

PLOTS OF

URINARY CALCIUM EXCRETION AND

BONE MASS CHANGE

Figure 3 is presented to show a comparison of a linear with an exponential plot of the same variable (urinary calcium excretion), and of the exponential plots of two variables (urinary calcium excretion and bone mass change).
The figure is based on the urinary calcium and the bone mass data for Subject D of this group of subjects when he was on bed rest with 0.7 gram of calcium provided daily and a mean of 0.686 gram consumed.
The slope of the regression line for the urinary calcium loss was +0.13406 units and the probability that this slope differed significantly from zero was <0.@25. The urinary calcium values are plotted on a daily basis, and are not averaged for a group of succeeding days as is the custom of many investigators. Therefore, the values show a wider range than if the means for a period of several days were plotted.
The trends shown by the linear and the exponential computer plots for urinary calcium were similar for all four men of this group for this

bed rest unit, as was the exponential plot for the bone mass values during the same bed rest period. The figures slmwn here are only intended to be representative.
One section of one bone involved in these computer plots by no means represents the changes which are taking place in the entire skeleton. Nevertheless, the trend of negative change shown in the bone mass plots bears a relationship to the trend of excretion of calcium in the urine, even though the total weight of this element lost in this bone section is not presumed
to be equal to that lost in the urine. A comprehensive bulletin is being prepared
for publication by the Texas Woman's University presenting data and graphs for all subjects for all parts of all units included.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Mr. John Hornbuckle, Director of the TWU Data Processing Center, for assisting with the statistical analysis of the data involved in this brief preliminary report. Thanks also are due to Jessie Ashby, Reba Fry, and Lenoir O'Rear, for coding and otherwise preparing the data for computer processing.

COMMENTS

Dr. NORDI,'ó. In what order were these balances

done?

Dr. KL&eP_

These are different subjects.

Dr. NOm_IN. Dr. K_PER.

The previous one was the same subject ? Yes, the 1.5 gm intake was done first.

The 0.7 was done second and third purposely. Dr. NORDIN. With regard to figure 3, in the lower

two graphs, which is the log and which is the semi?

Dr. MACK. That is not a log scale. In the upper two

graphs points
Dr.

the dots are the actual

for the urinary calcium.

NORDI:_. Urinary

r-alcium

values for the data does not change by

100 mg a day from one day to the next.

have been some urinary collection

error

There must or, possibly,

some analysis error. Dr. KLAPPER. This

goes up to 400 mga

day. This

is the actual expression

in hundreds of milligrams.

Dr. NORDIN. It is not a semilog plot. It is arithmetic.

Which is the semilog, Dr. Klapper?

Dr. MACK. The semilog was done by the computer

when it made the regression

line.

Dr. RICH. I gather that the squares are the corn-

184

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

0.450 g
0.400
0.350
=_ 0.300
0.250
0.200

Sublect D
14-day Bed l_st with O. 7 Calcium Provided Daily (0.659 gram calcium Ingested) First Order Regression Computer Plot and Data PoInts for Urlnary Calcium Excretion

0.450 E

_g

0.400

o _ 0. 350 _ 0.300

0.250 0.200

Same Subject during Same Bed Rest Period, Urinary Calcium Excretion.
Semi-log Computer Plot and First Order Data Points

__

2.600

░!_ ]'Jill

:

s __

2.500
2,,00

__ _"

2.300 2.250

_' !

Same Subject during Same Bed Rest Period, Bone Mass per day. Semi-log computer Plot and First Order Data Points

FIGUP.E 3.---Comparison

of a linear

computer calcium

plot of calcium urinary excretion

excretion

and bone mass change.

with exponential

plots of urinary

REGRESSION

CURVES FOR URINARY

CALCIUM AND BONE MASS :v_ALUES

185

,"
i

puter's running average from the individual

data ? Are

these the black dots that are hard to see?

Dr. _m_

Ye_

.
Dr. MACK. The black dots are the actual

data points.

That is the computer semilog curve.

Dr. RICH. The earlier slide of the very early change

in the density of the os calci$, those showing very uni-

form straight lines, I presume also those are the com-

puter average of the actual figures.

Dr. MAO]L They are the computer logs l_sed on the

equation of least squares.

Dr. ROCKOFF. HOW many fills analyzed

are repre-

sented by each dot?

Dr. MACK. One fill taken once but analyzed

four

times for each day. There was a film a day unless one

was skipped accidentally

for _0me reason.

When we

were preparing

for this, which we did for several

months, we took two and three films a day, and it re-

quired too much radiation

on the patienó_

One film

a day analyzed four times has been our standard.

We

deviate from that for certain research purposes.

Dr. URIST. Dr. Mack, you have a very important

clinical observation

here. We want to compare your

results with those of Dr. Whedon and with John Eager

Howard's

lmtients

who were immobilized.

At the bot-

tom of this curve that showed

the negative

calcium

balances,

what was the magnitude

of the negative

calcium balance at the end of 14 days in these patients?

Dr. MACK. The greatest one was --0.813 gram mean

balance for the 14 day_

Dr. URIST. I wonder how this compared

with Dr.

Whedon's

values on paralyzed

polio patients

and John

Howard's

values on patients immobilized

in treatment

of fracture.

Dr. WH_Or_.

I think a more pertinent

point would

be not just knowing

about the greatest

change, but

what the change was in the various subjects and some

idea of the mean change (mean daily negative balance

for first 14 days: 597 mg for five subjects at 500 mg

intake; 313, for four at 700; 174, for four at 1500).

Nevertheless,

to indicate

an order of magnitude,

the

shift in calcium balance during about 14 days in the

four normal subjects, immobilized

in plaster (Deitrick

et al.; 1948), would be of the order of 100 to 200 nag

per day (135 rag/day,

range 98 to 168). As you will

recall our subjects were kept at bed rest for 6 and 7 weeks and the increase in calcium loss, the negative of calcium balance steadily increased until the fifth or

sixth week (mean daily negative tmlance for 6 to 7

weeks immobilization:

236 rag, range 156 .to 380).

The level of shift at 2 weeks is only part way along

the curve. At the same level of intake, 920 rag, 5 para-

lytic polio patients

had a mean daily negative calcium

balance during the second to third months of 439 rag,

range 277 to 575.

Dr. MACK. Dr. Whedon,

subjects

on 0.5 of a gram

low?

that value I gave was for my

intake.

You had none that

Dr. WHEVON. This is a very good point.

Dr. Mack

has been doing a aeries of studies at different calcium

intake levels. Our studies of normal subjects were all

at the same calcium intake levels which was 920 mg

of calcium per day. Dr. SMrrH. Do I understand

that you were giving

10,000 units of vitamin D? That is approaching

a

level where there may be a primary action of vitamin

D on the bone.

Dr. MACK. That is vitamin A equivalency

and takes

in carotene.

Vitamin D was 400 units.

Dr. RICH. The very interesting

aspect of your study

is the correlation

of the actual bone mass changes wiCJa

the balance studies reported previously.

It is intrigu-

ing that you find that your patients who lose the most

calcium lose about 1% of the skeleton

per day, if I

understand

correctly

from the os calcis.

that your coefficients

refer to loss

This should cause a less of about

a gram per day from the body in terms of balance re-

sults. You are very close if you have a 600 mg loss;

it is surprising

that it would be that close in two such

different techniques.

[See postconference

note below--

Ev.]

Dr. WHEVOr_. I admire Clayton Rich's desire to bring

about a correla,tion

here, hut I think it is quite risky.

Remember,

this is just the os calcis and the rate of

loss from trabecular

bones could be exceedingly

dif-

ficalt to assess and should be greater than for the total

skeleton.

Dr. RIcH. I agree. I was pointing out the similarity

of figures.

It is an order of magnitude.

[Editor's postco_tJerence

note: This attempted

corre-

lation is of great interest.

In fact, however, the es calcis

density loss reported by Dr. Mack was 10-14% in 2

weeks for the 0.5 g calcium

intake group, rather

than 1% as Dr. Rich thought.

The densitometric

rate

of loss, when applied to the whole skeleton containing

10_ to 1500 g of calcium, would predict a loss of 100

to 200 g total for the 2-week period, or 7 to 14 g mean

loss per day. Since, in contrast, the mean loss for this

group by balance study was 0.5 to 0.8 g per day, the

correlation

is not close and would tend to support the

idea that the considerably

trabecular

os ealcis loses

calcium at a much greater rate (10 to 15 times) than

the average for the whole skeleton.

The same general

ratio appeared to hold at the 2.0-g intake level where

the os caleis density loss was 3 to 6% and the mean

daily calcium balance --0.2 to --0.32 g. Examination

of this association

in on-going and future studie_ is

potentially

of considerable

value.--D.W.]

Dr. bLaCK. Again, that loss of nearly 1 g a day is from the lowest level of calcium that we feed.

Dr. %_hedon, I did wa_t to mention that you had

_me slides at a previous conference

show a correlation

between calcium

in which you did intake level and

urinary loss.

Dr. WHEDON. Dr. Mack is referring

to studies that

we have done with patients with osteoporosis in which

we could infuence

the calcium balance significantly

by

varying the calcium intake.

Normal "O steop orotic" Bone Loss

SWAW_._ M. G_, Crmis-rAB_ ELL_NOa M. Pao, ,'a,_o ET_ Fels Research Institute

G. ROrrMaNN, I. H_I.L

The behavior of cortical bone and peripheral bone during the age-associated period of central
bone loss has been the subject of some dissension. There is a common belief that conical bone does

not become reduced
and that peripheral late in the disease.

in osteoporotic bone disease_
bone is spared until very Some of these statements

have been made in reference to experimental

studies on rats (for example_ the work of

Ellinger et al._ 1952, as quoted by Malm, 1958),

or in reference to the sheep experiments

of

Benzie et al._ 1956. Customary clinical con-

centration on the lower spine undoubtedly con-

tributes to this opinion (cf. Gershon-Cohen

et

al., 1953).

On the other hand_ there is growing evidence

that cortical bone_ peripheral bone, and even

nonweight-bearing

bone participate

ess of bone loss_ Such evidence

in the proccomes from

dry, defatted skeletons and ashed skeletons (see

Trotter_ 1954; Baker, 1964), from radiographic

studies of the arm, elbow_ and femur (Meema_

1963; Meema and Meema_ 1963; Smith, 1964;

Smith et al, 1964 a_ b; Barnett and Nordin,

1960; Nordin, 1965). These well documented

studies indicate that peripheral cortical bone

loses with age and in osteoporosis. In view of the technical difficulties in in vi_:o

clinical or field appraisal of bone loss in the

spine, it is of particular interest to ascertain

the extent to which bone loss takes place in the

hand, which is readily accessible to radiography

and quite suitable for a variety of techniques

of bone measurement.

The present paper is

concerned with the measurement of bone loss in

the hand, in individuals of three racial groups,

and in serial, longitudinal, sectional, context.

as well as in cross-

METHODS

AND MATERIALS

The present study is based upon

tional and longitudinal

measurements

cal thickness on the second metacarpal,

cross-secof cortiin a total

of nearly 1_000 subjects_ 25 to 101 years of age. The subjects, unselected with respect to bone disease, included over 600 volunteer

participants in long-term studies in growth and

development

in the Fels Research Institute,

including members of the Senior Citizens

Group of Yellow Spring_ 60 subjects of Jap-

anese and Chinese ancestry resident in south-

western Ohio who participated in studies of the

relationship

between diet and bone loss_ and

over 200 skeletalized Negro subjects of known

age_ sex, and cause of death_ from the Terry col-

lection of Washington

University

School of

Medicine_ St. Louis_ Me.

Measurements

of cortical thickness

were

made with pinpoint calipers on standardized

postero-anterior

radiographs

of the left hand,

reading out to the nearest 0.1 mm or better (cf.

Garnet

al._ 1963, 1964). Intraobserver

and

interobserver

replicability

of the measured

values exceed 0.98, as previously described in

this Symposium.

Error analysis of interob-

server differences in the longitudinal

part of

the study showed that the RMS error attribut-

able to interobserver

difference was approxi-

mately 0.15 ram.

In aAdition to the cross-sectional

4-decade

comparison of cortical thicknesses, it was also possible in over 49 women and 26 man to make

187

792-955

0 - 66 - 13

188

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSIT01VIETRY

T,u_im IA.--Age-Assoc_ated

Loss--Cortical

Thickness of the Second Metacarpal

I _"
]

Ohio whites

Age

267 Males

352 Females

N

X

SD

N

i

SD

Missouri Negro skeletons

111 Males

N

X

SD

117 Females N
SD

25-34 .....

62

5.9

0. 6

153

5.4

0.8

24

5.3

0.7

24

4.8

0.7

35-44 .....

92

5.8

0. 7

85

5.5

0.7

24

5.2

0.6

25

4.6

0.5

45-54 .....

60

5.7

0. 7

61

5.2

0.7

22

4.6

0.6

22

4.0

0.6

55-64 .... 2 34

5.3

0.6

31

4.6

0.6

20

4.7

0.6

20

3.9

0.8

65-._ .....

19

4.7

0. 4

22

3.7

0.7

21

4.3

1.0

26

3.3

0.7

Decrease_.

20%

Ę Mean age: males 72, females 74--March 1965 data.

31%

19%

31%

TABLE IB.--Age-Associated

Loss--Cortical

Area of the Second Metacarpal

Ohio whitos

Missouri Negro skeletons

Age

267 Males

352 Females

111 Males

117 Females

S

N

i

25-34 ........... 35-44 ........... 45-54 ........... 55-64 ........... 65 ..............

62

59. 6

153

44. 7

24

57. 1

24

43. 6

92

5& 5

85

45. 7

24

53. 3

25

45. 1

60

59. 7

61

43. 8

22

50. 7

22

39. 0

34

58. 5

31

42. 2

20

53. 1

20

3& 5

19

50. 6

22

36. 6

21

48. 8

26

34. 1

Decrease ........

15%

18%

15%

22%

TABLE IC.--Age-Associated

Loss--Cortical

Ratio of the Second Metacarpal*

Ohio whites

Missouri Negro skeletons

Age

267 Males

352 Females

111 Males

117 Females

N

N

25-34 ........... 35-44 ........... 45-54 ........... 55-64 ........... 65 ..............

62

63

153

67

24

56

24

59

92

62

85

68

24

56

25

54

60

60

61

66

22

49

22

49

34

54

31

57

20

50

20

47

19

50

22

46

21

46

26

39

* Following Nordin ratio cortex/total periosteal diameter. Note cortical ratio is initially higher in females.

NORMAL

"OSTEOPOROTIC"

BONE

LOSS

189

l_ng term individual comparisons of bone loss, generally between the 4th and 5th decade and the 6th, 7th, and 8th decades. Individual spans between successive X-rays were not less than 15 years, and in some cases included a time lapse of 30 years or more.
FINDINGS
As shown in table I, cortical thickness decreased after the 5th decade in both sexes and
,,_,o_ a_d whites. For Ohio white males and for Missouri Negro males the amount of bone loss approximated 20%. For Ohio white females and Missouri Negro females alike, the amount of bone loss approximated 31%. Analysis of Japanese and Chinese data indicated a comparable age-associated loss of bone (r= -0.41), greater for the females than for the males. Though the race differences in the amount of compact bone were considerable, with the Chinese and Japanese subjects evidencing far less compact bone as previously shown at all ages (Cram, e_ al., 1963), there was no evidence of differences among these three populations in rates of bone loss with age_

10 6_N

8
o3 laJ {D

la_ O
or4 tO

52

II V7

4.6 4.4 -t2 -tO -08 -06 -04 -0.2 0.0 02 04 08 08 tO
LONG "rERM CHANGE IN CORTICAL THICKNESS
FIGURE 1--Long term cortical bone loss in 42 women and 34 men. Over a span of 15-32 years, the majority of subjects of both sexes lose considerable compact bone. Only a few women and a limited number of men gained bone in excess of the RMS measuring error of 0.15 ram. While it is clear that the majority of individuals lose bone between the 4th and the 7th decades, there are systematic differences that set off the losers from the gainers.

Longitudinal analysis of individual male and female participants in the Fels studies in growth and development further confirmed both the universality of bone loss with age and the age at onset. The vast majority of subjects of both sexes lost bone between the 4th and 5th, and 6th and 7th decades as shown in figure 1. However, as indicated for the 49 females followed in complete longitudinal context, and as previously observed for males from the same subject population, there are some individuals who do not appear to lose bone with age; and, in fact, they actually gain bone. In addition to the individuals shown, some subjects (such as F-l) actually gained bone over 3 successive decades. On the other hand, the majority do lose bone; and in extreme cases, the loss of compact bone in the hand is so great as to be perfectly apparent in radiographs taken only a few years apart (see figs. 2 and 3).
In summation, cortical bone of the hand is lost in American white, American Negro, and Oriental subjects of both sexes, to the same extent, far more in females than in males; and this generalization holds for the majority of individuals within the population as well as fbr the population itself. Studied longitudinally, bone loss is not a phenomenon of a few osteoporotic extremes, but rather a characteristic of most individuals in all groups.
DISCUSSION
It isnow abundantly clear that cortical bone in the hand is lost progressively after the 5th decade, in both sexes and in whites, Negroes, and Orientals at about the same rate. With no de-
crease in the periosteal diameter _ and, therefore, the periosteal volume, the cortical thickhess of the second metacarpal and the absolute bone volume decreases 20% on the average in males. The rate of loss over the same time
period is greater (30%) in females.
Periosteal diameter remained essentially constant (7.83 vs 7.94 nun). However, by sign test, 35 out of 49 women gained in i_riosteal diameter from the earlier to the later ages sampled. Clearly, the reduction in cortical thickne_ was not due to reduced periosteal diameter.

190

DEVELOPMENT O F METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

as 35 years. Comparing individuals in their i d

and 4th decades to the same individuals in their *

6th and 7th decadss, the majority of subjects of

both sexes lose bone. For the purposes of de-

fining osteoporosis, however, the extremes of in-

dividually determined bone loss must be dis-

tinguished. I n static or cross-sectional studies,

there is inevitably confusion between those

individuals who have little bone (i.e., a thin

cortical wall) and those individuals whose cor-

tical deficiencies are due to bone loss. I n longi-

tudinal perspective, it is possible to separate the

nonlosers (or even bone gainers) after the 5th

decade from those who have lost 20 to 30% of

compact bone in the period of 15years or so. It

is the latter who constitute true osteoporotics,

who then pose particular problems for metabolic

study.

The loss rates for cortical bone in the hand

found in the present study agree with other

findings on the hand (Smith, 1964; Smith and

Walker, 1964) and on the elbow (Meema, 1963;

Meema and Meema, 1963; Nordin, 1965; and

others). They parallel-in order of magni-

I

FIGUR2E.-Above: 1.6 mm of cortical loss i n 28 years. Although the 3-decade bone loss here is 24%, this woman (MO 160) started with a well above average amount of cortical bone a t age 28 (6.9 mm) and a t 56 years of age still has an above average amount of cortical bone (5.3 mm). She is thus protected against mechanical bone failure for another 2 dec-

tude-loss rates for other tubular bones, and they are completely in line with measurements of bony loss in supporting bone made densitometrically on the first metatarsal (Garn et al., 1965b).

ades. Below: Bone loss in subject MO 49 over a 27-year period. Starting with 5.3 mm of cortex a t

age 31, she lost 1.2 mm (23%) by age 58, a t which age she experienced numerous fractures. In general, women who have below-avepage amounts of

corical bone to start with, and who lose average or

above average amounts of cortical bone a r e then

more subject to mechanical bone failure.

The female, with considerably less bone to begin with, also loses bone faster to the point where mechanical integrity may be impaired. Though we had previously believed that "osteoporotic" bone loss was less common in Negroes, and possibly rarer in Orientals, the virtual identity of the percentage losses in the close to 1000 individuals represented in this study attests to interpopulation universality of compact bone losS.
Individual rates of bone loss have been studied over a long time period, in some cases as long

FIGUR3E.-Radiographs of two women: one 88 years of age ( l e f t ) , and the other 77 years of age ( r i g h t ) , showing extreme loss of cortical bone. I n both of
these women, loss of cortical bone has proceeded t o the point where the entire thickness of the cortex is below expectancy for a 4-year-old girl from the same subject population. For comparative data see Garn et al. (1963) and G a m et al. (1965).

NORMAL "OSTEOPOROTIC"

BONE LOSS

191

" COrtical bone does participate in the ag_ associated process of bone loss, and peripheral as well as central bone is lost. Weight-supporting bone appears to be lost as rapidly as the nonweight-bearing bone of the upper extremity. After reviewing many aged hands in which cortical thickness of the second metacarpal is reduced to infant values, in which partial collapse of cortical bone can be seen, and in which the metacarpals themselves have lost space, and after viewing the feet of the same subjects, it is impossible to agree that "osteoporosis" is primarily a disease of the central skeleton. We cannot agree that bone loss, though greater, is not restricted to the female.
Extrapolating the values we have observed to the entire skeleton, "normal" or, more specifically, average pates of bone loss appear to be between 5 and 10% per decade. Under these circumstances, the average subject in this age span must be losing about 15 to 30 mg of calcium per day. The loss rate is probably proportional to the skeletal mass itself, since the rate of bone loss is proportional to the initial cortical thickness. However, loss of 15 to 50 mg of calcium a day would obviously be more serious for a small female with a 2- to 2.5-kilogram skeletal mass than to a large and heavy-boned male with a total skeletal mass possibly as great as 5 kilograms.
SUMMARY
The age-associated loss of cortical bone at mid-shaft on the second metacarpal was investigated in over 600 living Ohio whites, over 200 American Negro skeletons from the Terry Collection at Washington University, and in 60

living individuals of Chinese and Japanese descent.
Despite population differences in the average thickness of cortical bone, the loss in thickness approximated 20% in males and 30% in females of each group, with the bulk of the loss taking place after the 5th decade. Expressed as cortical area (corresponding more nearly to the Absolute Bone Volume of Frost), loss rates were proportional.
Explored on a purely longitudinal ba_s over a 15- to 30-year period, it was clear that bone loss was characteristic of the vast majority of aging individuals of both sexes. Indiviual longterm loss pates pointed to a very few who did not lose bone and a few who lost bone excessively. The latter may be considered as the "true" osteoporotics, distinguishable in longitudinal study from those who have little bone to begin with.
Extrapolated to the entire skeleton, the "normal" loss of bone appears to be between 5 and 10% per decade, indicating, for a reference man or women in the 45 to 65 age group, an average calcium loss of 15 to 30 mg per day.
ACKN O WLEDGMENTS
This study was supported in part by research grants AM-08255 and HD--00868 from the National Institutes of Health. We appreciate the assistance of Betty Wagner in the studies on Senior Citizens, Ruth Bean for scheduling many hundreds of subjects, and Dr. Mildred Trotter for permission to employ the Terry Collection material. Aletta Seehafer assisted in the manuscript preparation.

REFERENCES

BAKER, P. T. ; ANGE_, J. L. ; L_

M. /L ; and M_.EES, R. B. : Studies in Bone Density :

Age, Sex, Race, Altitude and Nutritional Factors. Department of Sociology and

Anthropology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pa. Privately

printed, 1964-

BAR.'CETT, E. ; and NomaIN, B. E. C. : The Radiological Diagnosis of Osteoporosis.

Clin.

RadioL, vol. 11, 1960, pp. 166-174_

192

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

IN BONE DENSITOMETBY

BENZIE, D. ; BOYNE, A. W. ; DALGARN0,

D. M. : Studies of the Skeleton of

Intake and Resorption

and Repair

A. C. ; DUCKWORTIt,

J. ; HILL,

the Sheep: II. The Relationship

of the Skeleton in Pregnancy

R. ; and WALKER,

between Calcium

and Lactation.

J.

Agric. Sci., vol. 48, 1956, pp. 175-187.

ELLINGER, G. M. ; DUCKWORTH, J. ; and DALGARNO, A. C. : Skeletal Changes

During Preg-

nancy and Lactation

in the Rat: Effect of Different

Levels of Dietary

Calcium.

Brit.

J. Nutr., vol. 6, 1952, pp. 2.35-253.

GARN, S. M. ; ROHMANN, C. G. ; and NOLAN, P., Jr. : Studies on the Development

of Compact

Bone in Normal Individuals

and in Endocrine and Nutritional

Abnormalities.

Depart-

ment of Growth and Genetics,

Fels Research

Institute,

Yellow Springs, Ohio. Privately

printed,

1963.

GARN, S. _-; ROHMANN,

C. G. ; and GUZMAN, M. A. : Malnutrition

ment in _he Pre-School

Child.

In : Prevention

of Malnutrition

W. Henry SebrelL ed. Food and Nutrition

Board, National

National Research Council, Washington,

D.C., 1965.

and Skeletal Develop-

in the Pre-School

Child,

Academy

of Sciences--

GARI_', S. M. ; ROHMANN, C. G. ; and NOLAN, P., Jr. : The Developmental

Nature

of Bone

Changes during Aging.

In : Relations

of Development

and Aging, James E. Birren, ed.

Charles C. Thomas, Springfield,

Ill., 1964.

GARN', S. M. ; WAGNER, B. ; and COLBERT, C. : Unpublished

data. Department

of Growth

and Genetics,

Fels Research

Institute,

Yellow Springs, Ohio, 1965.

GERStION-COHEN,

J. ; RECHTMAN, A. M. ; SCHRAER, H. ; and BLUMBERO, N. : Asymptomatic

Fractures

in 0steoporotic

Spines of the Aged.

J. Am. Med. Assoc., vol. 153, 1953,

pp. 625-627. MALM, O. J. : Calcium

Requirement

and Adaptation

in Adult Men. Oslo University

Press,

Oslo, 1958. MEEMA, H. E. : Cortical

Bone Atrophy

and Osteoporosis

as a Manifestation

of Aging.

Am.

J. Roentgenol.,

vol. 89, 1963, pp. 1287-1288.

MEEMA, H. 'E. ; and MEEMA, S. : Measurable

Roentgenologic

Bones in Senile Osteoporosis,

J. Am. Geriat. Soc., vol.

Changes 11, 1963,

in Some Peripheral pp. 1170-1182.

Nora)IN, B. E. C. : The Relation

between

Dietary

Parts of the World.

A Report to the Nutrition

Calcimn Section

and Osteoporosis

in Different

of the World Health Organiza-

tion. Privately

printed, 1965.

SMITH, R. W., Jr. : Osteoporotic

Changes

in Bone

Annual Meeting of the American

Public Health

Mass With Age. Presented

at the 92rid

Assoc., Inc., New York, 1964.

SMITH,

R. W., Jr. ; and FRAME, B. : Concurrent

Axial and Appendicular

Osteoporosis:

Its Relationship

to Calcium

Consumption.

New Eng. J. Med. (in press).

SMrrH, R. W., Jr. ; and WALKER, R. R. : Femoral

Expansion

in Aging Women:

Implica-

tions for Osteoporosis

and Fractures.

Science, vol. 145, 1964, pp. 156-157.

TROTTER, M. : A Preliminary

Study of Estimation

of Weight of the Skeleton.

Am. J.

Phys. Anthrop., vol. 12, 1954, pp. 537-552.

COMMENTS

Dr. ROCKOFF. IS it possible that marked changes

in

technique

over the years

ness measurement?

could

alter the cortical

thick-

Dr. GARN. DO you mean marked technique

in FPSKV

density?

We have examined

the effects of density

variations

per se. Down to the point where they are

too light to measure,

they do not affect what you are

talking about. Dr. ROCKOFF.

HOW about

the kilovoltage

on the two

studies?

This looks like

Does that include kilovolt?

a higher

kilovolt

study.

Dr. GARN. Kilovolt

changes make a difference

in the

density equivalent

values since they change the ratio of

apparent

densities between bone and the various type of

wedges.

They do not in our findings affect the corti-

cal thickness

measurement

except possibly

at very

high kV's, which we have not yet evaluated.

Our

techniques

for the hand have been on a screen-type

film between

30 and 40 PKV, that is, 30 plus twice

part thickness.

The nonscreen

film technique

we are

using PKV

in connection

with

at the requirement

densitometry

is fixed at 50

of the film manufacturer.

This variation

should

not be a problem.

However,

Dr. Paulus has recently sent us some films from Guatemala taken at 120 PKV. I cannot answer your ques-

tion in regard to that.

We have to do some of the

same people at this extremely

high PKV and our con-

ventional

PKV.

In our senior citizens study, many aging hands look

something

like vacuole syndrome

in this reduction

in

carpal space.

You will find in most of the group in

the 70's, 80's, and 90's a variety of clinical symptoms.

"- Ja_

NORMAL

"OSTEOPOROTIC"

BONE LOSS

193

Ę I_. ROCKOFF. With regard

to the carpal

bone

changes, one patient you showed had typical rheuma-

toid arthritis` Dr. GARN. These carpal bone changes, however, aP-

pear in subjects

which do not evidence signs of ar-

thritis as well. In addition, the changes in the hand, in

terms of cortical thickness,

are parallel to changes in

the first metatarsal

which bone, lacking a decent cor-

tex, has to be explored

purely densitometrieally.

Now, there are three points I would like to make

here. First, of course, is the over all reduction

in

cortical thickness

in subjects of both sexes.

We had

bored incidentally

that th_ statement

thA_t people .with

rheumatoid

arthritis

did not lose as much bone would

be true. It did not appear to be so.

Second, this change in both sexes appeared the racial groups that we have studied.

in all of

Third is the question of amount of change.

If we

can extrapolate

from the data we have here, the data

we have on the foot, if parallel order of losses in Dr.

Arnold's

material

may be considered,

then one may

project an estimated

bone loss that, while considerably

greater percentagewise

in the female than in the male,

50% greater of magnitude

percentagewise, in both sexes.

is of a comparable

order

Rather than thinking of

the male as not losing bone, it would appear from our

studies that the amount of bone loss is the same.

The

percentage

bone loss, however, is greater in the female

who has the smaller skeleton to start with. In terms

of the clinical implications

of these findings of ours,

I think we have to distinguish

between those indi-

viduals who have little bone to start with and lose an

average amount of bone and those individuals

who

were average or had above average amounts of bone

to start with and then lose a considerable

above aver-

age amount

of compact bone.

Dr. ROCKOFF. The title of your talk was Normal

Osteoporotic

Bone Loss.

the series of normal?

Was your patient

within

Dr. GARN. The word normal I am here defining in

terms of people unselected

on the basis of illness, his-

tory, or any other factor.

In the case of the partici-

pants in our regular Feis studies, they joined the study at the time their first or their second child was 3

months itt utero.

They were unselected

people, normal

in that sense.

Then, we have the word "osteoporotic"

in quotation

marks for obvious reasons because, al-

though it is bone loss, there is the question of whether

it is osteoporosis

or not. Thirdly, we have the word

"bone" in quotation

marks because there is the ques-

tion of whether your bone, my bone, and his bone, in

terms of different types of bone, is the same.

I think,

Dr. Rockoff, you and I are probably in agreement

that

this is loss.

Dr. ROCKOFF. Yes, except you have an unselected

series rather than normal. walk in with an aml_utated

You can have a patient hand and that certainly is

a bone loss. I think there has to be some separation

of

people who have obvious disease.

The patient, if the

uric acids are normal, has a diagnosis

of advanced

rheumatoid

arthritis.

To say this is a part of a

spectrum of normal bone loss, I think, is wrong.

Dr. G_N. We have the fact that in her two sisters

we had a comparable

amount of bone loss. We have

not yet had her brother in. I think we have the problem of whom we exclude as well as whom we include,

which is the problem that I faced years ago in coro-

nary studies where many people argue that one could

not include anybody with a cholesterol

over 280 as a

"normal" individual

I think that as long as we define

our "normal"

growth in this sense, that while it is

then possible

to argue, as you have, about spec__iflc

individuals,

we do at least know what we are talking

about in terms of material.

Dr. ROCKOFF. I don't think you have to stretch

criteria very far to exclude tients who have an obvious mineral.

from disease

a normal study pathat can affect bone

Dr. NORDIN. I agree.

It will, of course emerge in

the statistical

evaluation,

unless half the patients

in

Dayton, Ohio, suffer from rheumatoid

arthritis.

These

cases will provide a basis which presumably will take into account when he establishes

Dr. Garn his normal

values against three standard

age. I cannot believe that one value,

deviations

off to one side, is going to b_

allowed by you to determine

your normal means.

Dr. ROCKOFF. Dr. Garn described the changes in her

wrist as occurring in many patients.

Dr. Nora)iN. It is unfortunate

he chose as his ex-

ample a case of severe rheumatoid the others are normal?

arthitis.

I presume

Dr. GARN. I noticed this lady because of all those we

had seen, she had the thinnest cortex.

We are wait-

ing for her to break her arm, also her two sisters prob-

ably will break theirs.

I would like to point out _at

if you look at the bones of the older subjects, I do not

feel that you are going to find more than 10% whom

you would then call normal by usual clinical standards.

The majority

of the individuals

over 65 have not only

marked loss of bone material

in the first metatarsal

but

tremendous

enlargement

of the sesamoids

of the first

metatarsal.

In several cases the tarsal sesamoid grew

to the walnut size in the X-ray.

I had not known of

the situation

before we started looking at the feet of

the aged. As soon as we start reviewing

these older

subjects, a variety of conditions appear in the X-rays`

The question, then, is : Who should we throw out from

such a group and ones for the point
Dr. SMITH. Dr.

are the ones remaining of our study? Garn, you mentioned

the normal a 23%, some-

thing like that, reduction

in bone loss. Now are we

talking about a 23% reduction

in bone thickness

be-

cause it is endosteal

loss? That does not mean 23%

reduction in the total amount of bone that is in that

total hand, does it?

Dr. GARN. The 23% lass of thickness in cortex was

not markedly

different from the percentage

loss if one

expressed it as a percent of cortical area.

Comments on Cortical Thickness Measurements

I will define Dr. Rockoff's arthritis. We

the population

in answer to

questions about rheumatoid

did exclude the rheumatoids,

the cortisone-treated

patients,

general outpatient population

two thousand women.

but they are a in this study of

I have here some data on the metacarpal cortical thickness mentioned by Dr. Garn 2 days ago, measured essentially in the same way, not

at the mid-shaft but at the point of maximum cortical thickness.

In data plotted against age, Dr. Garn's Southern Ohio white females bear out his com-

ment of 2 days ago that when independent workers use different methods, on the one hand, or calipers, we come to essentially comparable values for the mid-shaft of the second meta-

carpal. In regard to Dr. Nordin's comments as

to any particular

dip at a certain age, as to

whether this is significant I do not know; I

doubt it. It looks fairly linear with time.

Here we have plotted out the changes, the re-

gression in the mid-shaft, second metacarpal

thickness for all subjects as against the regres-

sion for the same position on the Negro popula-

tion, which are included in this group. That is,

I have not taken the Negroes out of the total

subject group. If we were to do this, it might

shift this curve a little bit more and perhaps

make the P value a little more impressive.

We

do see then a change in the Negro with age, but at a somewhat slower rate.

I have divided the regression of the mid-

shaft metacarpal

tlfickness into two groups

based on visual estimated relative vertebral den-

sity. For whatever it is worth, when women with the good bone (that is, with grades zero

RICHMOND W. SMITH, JR. Division d End___mo!ogy Henry Ford Hospital

and one, essentially normal vertebral density,

which is comparable to the density seen in 25-

year-olds by a series of studies we have made)

are compared with the rate of loss in the meta-

carpal for tim women with the bad spines (that

is, those who show a loss of vertebral density

1/M again we are talking about the second and

third lumbar vertebra, visually estimated), we

can't say that there is a difference in the rates

of loss in metacarpal thickness between the good

spine group and the bad spine group.

In respect to Dr. Nordin's comments as to

whether we have physiological

osteoporosis

and perhaps a pathological

osteoporosis,

we

have the distribution

of metacarpal

cortical

thickness for our symptomatic

multiple frac-

ture group scattered along the mean value for

the survey group, that is, the asymptomatic

am-

bulatory group. If we take two standard devi-

ations which would be about 1 ram, we have

women at age 60 who have very good metacar-

pals and we have osteoporotic patients who go. well below the two standard deviations from the

average value for the asymptomatic

or so called

normal population. are needed.

Much more data obviously

In respect to the femur, we found in the two

thousand subjects that with age there was a very

definite regression of mid-shaft femoral cortical

thickness in all subjects, black and white; we

have the values for 132 Negro women. I think

the irregularities

are due to sample size, and

not perhaps to any age significant variations. There is a difference between the two racial

groups. If one measures

the leg in mid-position

and

195

196

DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

measures at the same point as one measures cor-

tical thickness, one will find with age a very definite increase in the external or periosteal

diameter.

This appears to be greater for the

Negro population.

This perhaps is sample

size ; we have very few in this age group for t:he

Negro women. But it is occurring in both and

appears to be occurring more rapidly in the

Negro female. We have compared the expansion of the ex-
ternal diameter at mid-shaft, in 31 to 32 ran-

domly selected subjects from this population

group you have just heard about. In the sub-

trochanteric

area the expansion was exact-

ly one-half of the mid-shaft, and the femoral

neck, again read in the same film, showed less

than a millimeter increase. Our suggestion is

that perhaps with age or with continuing

weight bearing there is a flexion in the mid-

shaft which activates subperiosteal bone accre-

tion. The significance of this, of course, to os-

teoporosis is not known at this time, but one

can see that if this continues substantially,

it

makes the neck vulnerable to fracture if it is

becoming

more rigid due to mid-shaft

expansion.

COMMENTS

Dr. TROTTER. I would like to ask Dr. Smith how

much range there is in the site of greatest

diameter

or

greatest

width of the cortical

bone in the

there much range or is it in approximately

place or level of the shaft?

shaft.

Is

the same

Dr. SMITm When you measure

the

maximal

cortical thickness

is esselttially

lint actually our X-rays cut off; we did

whole fenmr, at mid-shaft, not look at the

lower femur.

Dr. URIST. I think we can confirm that We have done this with microradiographs.

observation. There is a

layer down

of bone in the severe osteoporotics

that

and it is not Haversian,

it is lamellar.

is laid There-

fore there is a qualitative is laid down.

difference

in the bone that

Dr. SMITH. YOU are lamellar bone.

speaking

of circumferential

Dr. URIST. Yes. We have shown this in our radio-

graphs.

I don't think any of us appreciated

that it was

measurable

until you demonstrated

it.

In your discriminate

slide on aortic calcification,

calcification,

this is just in-

this is in the elastica lamel-

la. This is the specific thing that increases

with time.

I do not know whether

it is related

to physiologic

osteoporosis

or pathologic

osteoporosis,

but it is a

definite process that increases

tings, and Lowry

measured

with time. B_tyer, Has-

this chemically

iR un-

selected cases at autopsy. Dr. SMITtt. I think it might

suggest

that there are

changes going of the bone.

on in connective

tissue of the structure

We made a rough gradation

of the degree of aortic

calcification,

not whether it is present or not. We used

an arbitrary

scale, one to four. What I have presented

is accumulated

scores for the grade zero and one, that

is, good spire patients matched against the more osteo-

porotic,

and again asymptomatic

osteoporotic

women

versus the inore severely

osteoporotic.

We have done

this now for all two thousand

patients.

Then, for the

three 10-year age groups we have given the relative

scores of aortic calcification

on the basis of one to four.

I can't do it any better than that.

I can't weigh it, I

don't know how to measure

it, but as the subjects get

older, the differences

narrow.

These are the relative

values, and I can't carry the interpretation

further

than that.

Dr. URIST. I think Dr. Babcock's

presentation

earlier

was a good demonstration

that Dr. Cameron's

technique

can be used clinically.

This is an apt subject for pre-

sentation

in this symposium

for NASA since here is

an experimental

animal that demonstrates

pathologi-

cal osteoporosis

because

these are young animals.

They also demonstrate

the effect of immobilization

and

confinement

in a cage which would be comparable

to

the couch where the astronaut

would have to sit in for

a month at a time.

I first became

acquainted

with

this condition

in chickens when they brought me some

of the mass.
This creased

specimens,

and I found that they had low bone

was very exciting

because the bone mass in-

with exercise.

This is not a problem which

has anything

to do with aging.

I changed

the name

to cage layer osteoporosis

because the bones were thin-

ner, they were more brittle,

they were light.

The

cortical bone was eroded from the inside only, and the

bones did not respond to any known treatment.

Dr. ROCKOFF. I would like to make some remarks

about general experimental

design and applicability

of

the various methods that have been mentioned

so that

we can all talk in the same terms.

First of all, I

think that most of the misunderstandings

that have

arisen have been in the interpretation

of data, because

people used different

means for selecting

their popula-

tions and they were then working

with markedly

dis-

similar systems.

People have been talking

in terms

of accuracy

and precision

as applied to half centime-

ters in the case of hens, and many, many centimeters

in the case of human vertebral

bodies.

I think these

differences

have to be stressed

when people talk about

one technique

and whether it looks as though it might

be potentially

better than another.

It has to be defined

in terms of what parts of the body are being dealt with.

These are just random unrelated

comments,

but Dr.

Mack. with regard to your system of replication,

you

PRESENTATION

197

said you do not do more than one film because of the

radiation dosage.

I would suggest that the dosage level with a couple

of millimeters

of added aluminum

filtration

for the

ealcaneous

with a fairly well collimated

beam is about

0.03 r. If you do a film a day for 30 days you are still

less than 1 r. Considering

that bursitis of the shoul-

der used to be treated with 75 r a day for 3 days, we

are talking about dosages that have been shown to do

nothing deleterious

to the human body.

Dr. MACK. Where we were doing the os calcis and the finger, we did more films, but when we added other

bones, we eat down to one and replicated

the measure-

ment Earlier bones.

of that one film. we did do more

I am sure than one film

you are correct. on the two small

CONFERENCE

CONCLUSION

Co, !uding Remarks

G. DONALD Wmmo_ D_E W. JENKINS

Dr. JE.nxi.ns. I should like to congratulate the speakers and the chairman this morning

for keeping to the schedule, even though we had a very full and complete schedule. I now shall call on Dr. l_7_edon for concluding remarks.

Dr. Wm:Do.n. Thank you, Dr. Jenkins.

I

think that perhaps the most significant thing I

could say at this time is that from the experi-

ence we have had over the past 21_ days no very

great or weighty comments need to be made.

We have certainly citing time. When man and I conferred

had an enjoyable and exDr. Jenkins and Dr. Neuby telephone and letter to

select this program and the participants,

as I

indicated at the beginning of the conference, we

purposely tried to obtain people from as many

different disciplines as possible in order to de-

velop interaction between individuals of differ-

ent training

and different

scientific back-

grounds. Obviously, the problem of bone den-

sitometry requires the combined tive efforts of people with many of training and experience.

and collaboradifferent sorts

I noted through the conference a predicted

language or communication

difficulty among

people with different backgrounds.

But I also

noted some evident problems, I would even say

mistakes, in planning studies and in procedures

in studies when individuals

with one back-

ground of training and education undertook work in a quite different area of discipline. There was here and there through the confer-

ence an indication of hmppropriate

techniques

used and inappropriateness

of expression of the

data that they obtained.

I noticed this, of

course, particularly

in the individuals origi-

nally trained, let us say, in the hard sciences or

the nonmedical disciplines in taking up bio-

medical studies. But that is undoubtedly

be-

cause I am on the biomedical side, and I suspect

that others noted the same business in the

reverse direction when those of us having medi-

cal training tried to get into more mathematically oriented or physically oriented projects.

I think a lesson we might draw, a suggestion I would make, very cautiously and as tactfully as I can, is that those of us who are going to continue to do studies of this nature in which

we shift over into another discipline, should make very serious efforts to obtain sound advice from other individuals in the new fields that

we are going into before the project ever begins.

In this way we will get the nmst for our effort;

when we come to the end, we will have a better

chance of obtaining a meaningful

result, and

we will be able to present our data in a way

which will be most easily communicated

to

other individuals.

I say this with a very opti-

mistic feeling that the conference has been so successful that we shall have to have another
one. How soon and whether it will include

precisely the same individuals and be on precisely the same techniques, I am not sure. It will take some time to decide. But obviously

hone densitometry in the broadest sense is very

active and is propagating

very rapidly.

It will

be soon time, I think, to come back and meet

again, perhaps not in this room or under these

auspices but under some auspices. Thank you all very much. I am so glad that you enjoyed

yourselves. Dr. JE_KINS. This has been one of the most

201

2O2

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

vital, interesting, and sometimes exciting work-

ing conferences that I have attended.

The con-

ferenee has been of extreme value to NASA in

looking into present techniques and those which are being developed, and in helping us assess

their potential. It will help us in deciding what courses we shall follow in our future studies

in NASA in investigating

the skeletal and

muscular problems in relation to weightlessness

and in defining just how serious a problem

this is.

It is gratifying to find general agreement and resolution of most of the major controversial

problems in bone X-ray densitometry.

It is a

real accomplishment

to have the accuracy and

precision of this method clearly defined and the

magnitude of possible error accurately quanti-

fied. This is a worthwhile advance and will be

of great value in experimental

studies in the

Biosatellite,

Gemini, and Apollo Programs.

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY
_b

This conference has also pointed out the difficulties and need for more research in the area

of correlation of change of X-ray film density with change of bone mineral. Another problem that has been identified and requires more research is the correlation of change in mineral content of measured bones with the total change in the skeleton.

On behalf of NASA, I thank all of you for

interrupting

your busy schedules to participate

in this conference. We appreciate your submit-

ting manuscripts

as requested, and the editors

will edit the proceedings as fast as possible. We

appreciate the remarks of most of the partici-

pants that this conference has been of great

value to you. I_Iay I conclude by saying that

the conference has surpassed the expectations

of the organizers, and will be of lasting value

and importance to the sponsors.

Participants

Dr. James ▒rao!d Director of Research

Sumerlin

Memorial

7901 Frost Street

San Diego, Calif.

Pathology

Laboratory

Dr. Steven Department University

W. Babcock of Medicine
of Wisconsin

Medical

Center

Madison,

Wis.

Prof. John Cameron

Department

of Physics and Radiology

University

of Wisconsin

Madison, Wis.

Dr. D. Waiter Cohen

Department University Philadelphia,

of Periodontology of Pennsylvania
Pa.

Dr. Martin J. Cohen

Franklin

GNO Corporation

West Palm Beach, Fla.

Dr. Lawrence

F. Dietlein

Crew Systems Division

NASA Manned Spacecraft

Houston,

Tex.

Centel

Dr. Richard H. Follis, Jr.

Armed Forces Institute

of Pathology

Washington

25, D.C.

Dr. Leo Fox

Biotechnology

and Human Research

National Aeronautics

and Space Administration

Washington,

D.C_ 20546

Dr. Stanley M. Garn

Fels Research

Institute

Antioch Yellow

College Springs,

Ohio

Dr. A. J. Gilson, Director Division of Nuclear Medicine Jackson Memorial Hospital Miami, Fla.

Dr. Rufus R. Hessberg Crew Systems Division NASA Manned Spacecraft Houston, Tex.

Center

Dr. Lewis M. Hurxthal

Leahey Clinic 60,5 Commonwealth

Avenue

Boston 15, Mass.

Dr. Dale W. Jenkins

Chief, Environmental

National .__eronautics

Washington,

D.C.

Biology Program and Space Administration 20546

Dr. Walton L. Jones

Director, National

Biotechnology Aeronautics

and Human Research and Space Administration

Washington,

D.C_ 20546

Dr. Elsa Klapper Texas Woman's Denton, Tex.

University

Dr. Lawrence H. Lanzl

Department

of Radiology

University

of Chicago

Chicago, Ill.

Dr. George V. Leroy

Professor

of Medicine

University

of Chicago

950 East 59th Street

Chicago, Ill. 60637

School of Medicine

Dr. _ Lutwak

Director, Clinical Nutrition

Unit

Cornell University

Ithaca, N.Y.

Dr. Theodore N. Lynch Clinical Sciences Division USAF School of Aerospace Brooks Air Force Base San Antonio, Tex.

Medicine

Dr. Pauline B. Mack Director, Nelda Childers Stark Texas Woman's University Denton, Tex.

Laboratory

Dr. Constantine

J. Maletskos

Research Biophysicist

Massachusetts

Institute of Technology

Cambridge,

Mass.

Dr. Gerald McDonnel

Department University

of Radiobiology

of California

Medical

Center

Los Angeles 24, Calif.

203

204

DEVELOPMENT

OF METHODS

Dr. B. E. C. Nordin

Metabolic Research

Unit

The General Infirmary

Great George Street

Leeds 1, England

Dr. Arthur H. Norris

Gerontology

Branch

National Heart Institute

Baltimore Baltimore

City Hospital 24, Md.

Dr. John R. Olive

Executive

Director

American Institute of Biological

3900 Wisconsin

Avenue, NW.

Washington,

D.C.

Sciences

Dr. Herbert Pollack

Research and Engineering

Support

Institute

for Defense Analyses

1666 Connecticut

Avenue, NW.

Washington,

D.C. 20009

Dr. Clayton Rich

Chief, Radioisotope

Service

Veterans

Administration

Hospital

Seattle 8, Wash.

Division

Dr. S. David Rockoff Clinical Center

.National Institutes

of Health

Bethesda,

Md. 20014

Dr. Joseph F. Saunders

Environmental

Biology Program

National

Aeronautics

and Space

Washington,

D.C. 20546

Administration

Dr. Harold DeIlartment Pennsylvania University

Schraer of Biophysics State University
Park, Pa.

Dr. Richmond

_V. Smith. Jr.

Division of Endocrinology

Henry Ford Hospital

Detroit 2, Mich.

Dr. Leon National National Bethesda,

Sokoloff Institute Institutes

of Arthritis of Health

Md. 20014

and Metabolic

Dr. Thomas G. Stinchcomb

Illinois Institute Chicago, Ill.

of Technology

Diseases

IN BONE DENSITOMETRY

Dr. Nels Department University Chicago,

Strandjord of Radiology
of Chicago Ill.

Mrs. Mary Frances Thompson

American

Institute of Biologicai

3900 Wisconsin

Avenue, N.W.

Washington,

D.C. 20016

Sciences

Prof. Mildred Trotter

Department

of Anatomy

Washington

University

St. Louis 10, Mo.

Dr. Marshall

R. Urist

School of Medicine

University

of California

Los Angeles 24, Calif.

Medical Center

Dr. Sherman

P. Vinograd

Director,

Medical Science

Space Medicine Division

and Technology

National

Aeronautics

and Space Administratior

Washington,

D.C. 20546

Lt. N. Michael Voorhies

Environmental

Biology Program

National

Aeronautics

Washington,

D.C.

and Space 20546

Administration

Prof. George P. Vose

Nelda Childers Stark Laboratory

Texas Woman's

University

Denton, Tex.

Dr. G. Donald Whedon, Director

National National

Institute Institutes

of Arthritis of Health

Bethesda,

Md. 20014

and Metabolic

Dr. Napoleon

Wolanski

Department

of Growth

Fels Research

Institute

and Genetics

Yellow Springs, Ohio

Dr. Arthur H. Wuehrmann

Professor

of Dentistry

School of Dentistry

University

of Alabanm

Birmingham,

Ala.

Medical

Center

Dr. Marvin Zelen

National

Cancer Institute

National

Institutes

of Health

Bethesda,

Md. 20014

Diseases

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1966 0---792--955

