t

I

I

INTRODUCTION

Look at a patient lying long in bed. What a pathetic picture

he makes! The blood clotting in his veins, the lime draining

from his bones, the scybala stacking up in his colon, the flesh

rotting from his seat, the urine leaking from his distended

bladder, and the spirit evaporating

from his soul. R. A. J. ASHER

Deconditioning is an integrated physiological response of the body to a reduction in metabolic rate; that is, to a reduction in energy use or in exercise level. While it may involve assumption of a horizontal body position, it certainly perturbs bodily homeostasis -- at least temporarily. The reduction in physical activity that causes deconditioning is often associated with an increase in the time spent, for whatever reason, in a sitting or horizontal position. As a result, orthostatic factors may also contribute to the deconditioning mechanism.

The word decondition may be defined as "1 : to cause extinction of (a conditioned

response) 2: to cause to lose physical fitness" (Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 105h ed.,

s.v. "decondition."). This definition implies that psychologicaVemotional

factors may

accompany physical deconditioning, and it is this interpretation of the word that is used

throughout this volume.

It is apparent that deconditioning plays a major role in the mechanism of the

general adaptive (homeostatic) response that is initiated by exposure to prolonged bed

rest (BR). And the total homeostatic response to BR involves more than deconditioning

per se. For example, it has been shown that the restoration of plasma volume and

maximal work capacity after 4 weeks of BR deconditioning left other bodily functions

(submaximal exercise oxygen uptake and cardiac output, leg proprioception and posterior

leg muscle thickness and volume, head-up tilt tolerance, and sleep quality) functioning at

decreased levels. The precise effect of deconditioning on BR homeostasis is difficult to

determine, because the fundamental interactive neuro-endocrine-immune

control

networks that facilitate conditioning and deconditioning also act to maintain basic whole-

body homeostasis. For example, is the mechanism of BR-induced deconditioning

independent of the mechanism that provokes concomitant orthostatic intolerance; that is,

fainting?

Assumption of the recumbent body position for prolonged periods of time results

in a new adaptive-homeostatic

state. This state occurs in response to the mutually

interactive effects of the change in bodily position (hydrostatic pressure), to the virtual

elimination of longitudinal pressure on the bones, to the increased confinement with

possible reduction in total daily energy (exercise) expenditure, to the reorientation of

stimuli within the vestibular organs, and (otten) to altered socio-psychological

conditions.

The conditionedanddeconditionedstates of the body are part of a continuum that
includes the eucondition (see figure), which is representative of the physical fitness range in which most people function in their daily lives. Exercise training can move the fitness level from B to A, whereas deconditioning (aging?) can move it from B to C. Many factors associated with various body positions (horizontal, sitting, standing) and degrees of immobilization (limb-casted, whole-body casted) contribute to deconditioning, and they must be considered when data from different studies are compared.

Partial deconditioning. In ambulatory subjects with either free movement in all planes, or with part of the body immobilized but with otherwise free movement in all spatial planes, the fitness shift is from A (conditioning) area to B (eueondition) area in the figure. If there is BR, immersion, or ambulatory confinement and if(l) the whole body is free to move but only in the horizontal plane; or (2) if part of the body is immobilized with free movement only in the horizontal plane; or (3) if the whole body is immobilized (casted) with no movement in any plane, then the fitness shift is from B (eucondition) to C (deconditioning; aging) in the figure.

Maximal deconditioning. If there is BR, immersion or ambulatory confinement, the fitness shift is from A (conditioning) to C (deconditioning; aging) in the figure.

The exercise-training

(reconditioning)

syndrome affects total body homeostasis

by facilitating increases in work capacity and endurance, whereas deconditioning decreases physical performance. There are many interrelated factors that influence the

control parameters that seek to maintain the adaptive conditioning-deconditioning

syndrome. These control parameters can be better elucidated by subjecting otherwise

healthy ambulatory people to various stresses, such as exercise training and prolonged

spaceflight, bed rest, water immersion, hyperbaria, and isolation and confinement.

Changes in control parameters will be manifested in muscle function, orthostatic

tolerance, cardiorespiratory responses, musculo-skeletal systems, free-radical processes,

and body thermoregulation states.

with overarching effects on the subjects' psycho-sociological

A discussion of these factors and the control parameters constitutes the substance of this volume. Special emphasis is placed on delineating practical applications of the findings that will be of special interest to physicians, nurses, and other health-care workers.
JOHN E. GREENLEAF

I-
,) I L '" d "_t_
b h_- tW 3

5

1. PSYCHO-SOCIOLOGICAL

ASPECTS OF CONFINEMENT

DECONDITIONING

Gro M. Sandal', Ragnar V_emes*, and Holger Ursin:

It is a man's

own fault, it is from want of use, if his mind grows torpid in old age. SAMUEL JOHNSON

INTRODUCTION

Deconditioning, the physiological response to reduced activity, involves

psychological changes that may contribute to further inactivity by means of positive

feedback; the resulting changes in the musculoskeletal system may be an important cause

of the frequent complaints and sickness certifications concerning muscle pain (Ursin et

al., 1993). This restricted activity is related to motivational factors and to an active choice

of lifestyle. However, we will only deal with deconditioning as it occurs under

circumstances in which normal activity is restricted because of environmental factors.

Included will be data from isolation studies conducted as simulations of prolonged space

journeys, data from other long-term isolation studies, and data from submarine

expeditions, treks to polar regions, and diving experiments. The emphasis here will be on

psychological factors, including psychophysiological,

psychoendocrine,

and

psychoimmune parameters that affect the performance of individuals and groups, on what

changes occur, and on how to identify and counteract them. To some extent, proper

selection, training, and other organization of individuals may prevent these adverse

changes. Recommendations

will be made regarding the composition and training of

groups that have to live together in isolation for long periods and perform to high standards and under stressful conditions.

Weightlessness in space does not induce unique psychological problems except

for the novelty and inconveniences, and the necessity of being able to cope with them.

The real psychological challenges that are peculiar to space are the isolation and the

hazardous environment, living with the same few people for prolonged periods, and the

potential stress of escape and evacuation..This

physical deconditioning does not induce

serious psychological challenges, at least not during the mission (Ursin et al., 1993).

However, serious psychological changes may indeed affect all other physiological

parameters through the motivation for adaptation and prevention.

*Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway *Norwegian Underwater Technology Center, Bergen, Norway **Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

'4

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

Suedfeld and colleagues refer to these situations as "capsule environments" and

define isolated, confined environments (ICE) as a subset of extreme, unusual

environments (EUE) (Suedfeld, 1987; Suedfeld and Steel, 2000). The external

environmental and restricting factors make the internal environment important, and the

psychological and social environments become even more important because there is no

escape from the group. The dynamics of the group influence each individual, and each

individual influences the group; this well-being, performance, and in some cases survival

of the crew members depend on the coherence, them.

effectiveness,

and interactions between

Thus, the principal purpose of this chapter is to discuss the psychological changes

that occur when humans live in isolated environments in which physical activity is

limited and deconditioning is induced. We will also discuss the reciprocal effects, that is,

those of reconditioning.

To what extent do the psychological changes contribute to the

deconditioning state, and to what extent does deconditioning affect psychological

factors? Finally, we will describe briefly how potentially disastrous effects may be

counteracted by subject selection procedures, group composition, training, and other

preventive actions undertaken before, during and after the isolation.

PSYCHOLOGICAL

REACTIONS TO CONFINEMENT

Psychological factors are assumed to be a primary limiting factor for longduration spaceflights (Collet et al., 1991). Personnel working in space or in other isolated

and confined environments (ICE) may be exposed to unacceptably high levels of stress that might interfere with their performance of assigned duties, with their health, and even

with mission success. Documented psychological and psychophysiological

responses to

spaceflights and other ICE environments include transient disorientation and spatial

illusion, mild cognitive impairment, interpersonal tension, and degradation of performance (Rivolier, 1997).

Interpersonal issues will become increasingly important as space missions

become longer and crews become more heterogeneous as to experience, professional

background, and assigned duties (Helmreich, 1983). Data from aircrews have shown that

tension results in inefficient communication that may cause errors and interfere with

safety (Foushee and Manos, 1981). Interpersonal reactions that have often occurred

include (1) displacement of aggression to outside personnel; (2) "scapegoating" of crew

members deviating from the rest of the group; (3) formation of subgroups along national

or vocational lines; (4) unstable command structure; and (5) tension and conflicts

between crew members leading to territorial behavior and withdrawal interaction.

from group

Resistance and mistrust of outsiders, often referred to as the "us versus them" phenomenon, is one mechanism that unites isolated groups (Nicholas and Foushee, 1990). However, such intergroup tension might inhibit communication and interfere with

Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin

-2-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

the capacity of the group to accurately receive and process information from outside personnel, thereby resulting in errors of judgment and in performance decrements. How to control this phenomenon should therefore be addressed in the preparation for such missions. In the context of prolonged spaceflight, this problem also suggests the potential danger of relying too heavily on Earth-based command and support mechanisms (Nicholas and Foushee, 1990).

It is important to understand the critical periods that occur during crew

performance and adaptation. It has been assumed that there are long-term costs of

adapting to chronic stressors associated with isolated, operational environments.

Length

of stay in long-term, confined, and isolated environments correlates positively with

increased blood pressure and plasma catecholamine concentrations, and with negative

moods (Cohen et al., 1986). One important determinant of psychological reactions is

knowledge or expectancy of the end of the situation (Gushin, Kholin, and Ivanovsky,

1993). Rohrer (1961) described three broad stages of psychological reactions to

prolonged stays in Antarctic groups: (1) heightened anxiety, (2) settling down to routine

marked by depression, and (3) anticipation of termination of the situation marked by

emotional outbursts, aggressiveness, and rowdy behavior. An important aspect of a

stage-model of adaptation is that these reactions are assumed to occur in the same relative

phases of the isolation, independent of the actual duration and characteristics of the

environments. The experimental designs of many studies have been directed toward

confirming the occurrence of such critical phases. During simulation studies in

hyperbaric chambers, interpersonal tension increased from the middle toward the end of

the isolation (Sandal, Va_rnes, and Ursin, 1995; Sandal, 2000a, in press). Other data

suggest that psychological reactions in different environments change differently. Both

Palinkas et al. (1998) and Sandal (2000b, in press) found that groups in different

Antarctic environments exhibited different time patterns of psychological reactions. In a

previous study, we compared space simulation data with data collected during polar

crossings (Sandal et al., 1996). Under the former conditions personal coping increased

gradually over time, which was attributed to the relatively safe and predictable conditions

in the chambers. Members in polar crossing studies displayed a marked reduction in

anxiety and aggression from the second to the third quarter of their journey, whereas

homesickness increased noticeably over the course of the expedition.

The ability to predict psychological and interpersonal problems would enable both space crew members and outside personnel to intervene before those problems degrade health or operational situations. If participants expect undesirable incidents, then problems might be handled with greater tact because they would not be personalized. Such knowledge might ameliorate untoward consequences such that habitat design, work tasks, and schedules might be planned to minimize social and psychological problems. Different strategies for lighting schedules, celebrations, or distracting tasks, also might reduce the negative effects of foreseen crises (Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, 1990). In general, the need for privacy seems to increase with the duration of isolation and this need should be addressed in planning living compartments and scheduling free and leisure time for long-duration missions (Harrison, Clearwater, and McKay, 1990).

Sandal, Vaernes, and Ursin

-3-

Psycho-Sociological PERSONNEL SELECTION

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

A critical component of any personnel selection procedure is to identify the attributes required to perform the job successfully. The objective of selection strategies is twofold: (1) to eliminate unfit applicants, and to select from otherwise qualified candidates those who will perform optimally. An important distinction is therefore made between "selecting out" and "selecting in" criteria. Candidates need to be selected-out for medical and psychiatric disorders in an early phase of the process. The psychological selected-in criteria can be divided into two categories: (I) operational aptitudes, and (2) personality factors. In relation to operational aptitudes, it is important that candidates show above average performance for cognitive and psychomotor capabilities in logical reasoning, mental arithmetic, visual and auditory memory function, attention, perception, spatial comprehension, and psychomotor coordination. Selection criteria for astronauts related to personality have included motivation, social capabilities, stress coping, and work orientation (Santy, 1994). In the following sections we will focus on how these factors might be facilitated.
Personality
Personality is often defined as stable, deep-seated dispositions to respond in particular ways, and is reflected in relatively stable behavior over time that is consistent across situations. To the extent that desired behavior during confinement is related to stable traits, training is unlikely to produce desired changes. In fact, data from studies of the effects of cockpit resource management (CRM) training indicated that personality dispositions represented important limitations for the ability of military pilots to benefit from training (Chidester et al., 1991). An important implication of these findings is that approaches to ensure optimal crew performance need to balance selection and training strategies.
Individuals who cope and perform successfully under stressful conditions seem to have traits in common that differentiate them from those who do not; that is, they show (1) lower anxiety and less fear when in dangerous situations, (2) have high achievement motivation (Foushee, 1981), (3) have high need for external change, and (4) thrive on adventure and mastering difficult tasks (Rachman, 1991). These personality characteristics have been described as positive response outcome expectancies, typical of individuals who learn to cope and master stressful and difficult tasks (Levine and Ursin, 1991). The individual expectations of personal control in the specific situation seems to determine the stress response, both at the psychological level and at the physiological level with activation of the autonomic, endocrine, and immune systems.
An important factor in expectancy of control is use of defensive strategies. Defense is most likely to occur when no means of coping is available and when the level of fear is high (Lazarus, Averill, and Opton, 1974). The central aspect of this concept is that the trait is linked to the perception of the threat by the subject. By using tests of

Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin

-4-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

defensive strategies, that is, in the selection process, there is a shift in emphasis from the level of anxiety aroused or the intensity of the threat to the various ways in which the subjects handle and perceive the challenging (threatening) situation. There is considerable evidence for this position from empirical studies based on the following experimental designs: (1) longitudinal studies on serious near-miss and fatal accidents, (2) relationship to performance impairment in the threatening situation, (3) relationship to endocrine activation in threatening situations, and (4) relationship to perceived health complaints and immune reactions.

For evaluating defensive strategies the Defense Mechanism Test (DMT) is often used (Kragh, 1960; 1962). The basic assumption of the test is that if anxiety-arousing stimuli are used, then individual differences in the perceptual process may give insight into aspects of individual strategies for coping with the stress. In one longitudinal study, Neuman (1978) analyzed the predictive value of the DMT among Swedish air force pilots over a 10-year period. Of 225 trainees, 136 passed basic training: of this group 63 had high defense (HD) scores on the DMT and 73 had low defense (LD) scores on the DMT. Of the 63 HD subjects, 6 died in flight accidents while none in the LD group died in flight accidents. Furthermore, 15 of the 17 accidents with "total loss of aircraft" came from the HD group. Thus, those with higher defense scores appear to have performed poorly.

In performance research, Vaemes (1982) and V_emes and Darragh (1982) studied

how defensive reactions (measured by DMT) among deep sea divers related to more

specific reduction in performance. Among the 44 divers tested at a depth of 60 m, there

was a significant positive correlation (r = 0.39, p < 0.02) between reasoning impairment

and high defense scores. Furthermore, when combining manifest anxiety (MA) and high

scores on the reaction formation (RF) variable, of the 11 divers who had high MA and RF

scores, 9 had impairment of reasoning that exceeded the group median score (20%);

among the 11 divers who had low MA and RF scores, none showed a reduction in

reasoning that placed it below the median. These results support the usefulness of the

DMT when combined with anxiety tests for predicting poor performance tasks.

in dangerous

Baade et al. (1978) published the first study in which DMT scores were correlated

with psychobiological

measures of activation (stress response). Forty-four parachute

trainees were followed through their training period; factor analysis of multiple endocrine

measures (cortisol, growth hormone, testosterone, prolactin, epinephrine, and

norepinephrine) did not indicate the presence of a single activation factor. Rather, three

factors emerged; (1) cortisol, (2) testosterone, and (3) catecholamines.

These endocrine

factors related differently to psychological factors, suggesting that they reflected

independent nervous and endocrine response systems regarding effects of psychological

activation. The DMT scores correlated positively and significantly (p < 0.005) with the cortisol factor and to not-accepted parachute jumps, again confirming that DMT data

predicted poor performance in dangerous tasks.

Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin

-5-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

The data mentioned above indicated that defensive strategies may be dangerous in

situations in which survival depends on immediate and precise action. The defensive

strategy may also affect health parameters on long-term moderately stressful situations.

Increased experience in coping with stress together with interpersonal difficulties can

lead to lower immunoglobulin

levels, a long-term indicator of stress and health risk

factors (McClelland et al., 1980; Reily et al., 1981; Ursin et al., 1984; Endresen et al., 1989;

V_emes et al., 1988, 1991). V_ernes et al. (1987) analyzed data from 23 submarine officers

concerning relationships between personality factors and transitory/chronic

health

problems perceived during and after cruise missions. There was a higher frequency of

perceived health problems among these subjects than with those in other occupations; the

problems were mainly pain in the neck/shoulders (22% during the mission, 9% after the

mission), stomach problems (48% versus 0%), headache (22% versus 4%), and general

lethargy (61% versus 44%). Low immunoglobulin A (IgA) levels were correlated

significantly (r = 0.62, p < 0.02) with health complaints during cruise missions and with

high defense scores on the DMT.

Findings from a study of 45 North Sea saturation divers in a hyperbaric diving bell (Bergan et al., 1987) indicated significant negative correlations between immune levels and environmental factors: DMT scores correlated with both low IgG (r = -0.44, p < 0.05) and low complement component C3 (r = -0.46, p < 0.05). There were also several positive correlations between low immune levels and experience (number of days in saturation) indicating that long-term stress may lead to immune-related health problems. Divers with high DMT scores had significantly more sleep problems in the hyperbaric condition than those with low scores; those with a higher number of accidents had both high trait anxiety and high DMT scores that correlated highly (r = 0.45, p < 0.05) with the number of accidents within the diving bell.

Motivation

Motivation is the degree of interest and enthusiasm an individual exhibits for a

given job. Generally, astronauts must have a high degree of mission-oriented

motivation

and a lesser degree of personal motivational factors (Santy, 1994). Competitive

individuals who are driven by a desire to outperform others are likely to generate

interpersonal stress and hostility, adversely affecting collaborative performance and

further undermining the quality of the social environment which may already have been

compromised by the stressful conditions. These considerations strengthen the postulate

that astronauts should exhibit a strong willingness and desire to master challenging tasks

as a team.

Interpersonal Capabilities
Lack of interpersonal sensitivity might interfere with performance on tasks that require interaction and cooperation with others in a restricted living area. This lack of sensitivity may be counteracted by proper composition of the group. For example,

Sandal, Vaernes, and Ursin

-6-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

preference should be given to individuals who are caring and sensitive to the needs of

other people but, at the same time, they must also be sufficiently task- and achievement-

motivated to be able to cope and perform in isolated and confined situations (Chidester et aI., 1991; McFadden et al., 1994; Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin, 1996; Sandal et al., 1998,

1999). Interpersonal compatibility, in part, is determined by personality factors, for

example, by levels of achievement-motivation,

and individual dominance (Helmreich and

Wilhelm, 1985). Also similarities in values and attitudes might determine whether

people get along at an interpersonal level. Data from studies conducted in different

isolated and confined space, such as during Antarctic expeditions, and in submarines and hyperbaric chambers, have demonstrated that subjects who are both highly achievement-

motivated and interpersonally sensitive show superior performance. The personality

profile has been referred to as the "Right Stuff" in stressful team environments to

describe optimal psychological attributes in aerospace situations (Wolfe, 1979; King and Flynn, 1996). Poorer performance has been linked to personality profiles typified by a

hostile, competitive, interpersonal orientation ("Wrong Stuff'), and to low achievement-

motivation combined with passive-aggressive

characteristics ("No Stuff"). These

personality profiles have been evaluated and utilized in the selection of astronauts (Maki

et al., 1990; McFadden et al., 1994).

COUNTERMEASURES

FOR ALLEVIATING

IN ESTABLISHED

CREWS

PSYCHOLOGICAL

PROBLEMS

The psychological training of people who are to be exposed to occupational confinement requires that individual aptitudes, attitudes, and skills be improved in order to prepare them to meet mission demands (Manzey, Schiewe, and Fassbender, 1995), with focus on both the individual's ability to cope and perform, as well as on efficient coordination and cooperation within the group setting. For example, support techniques and interventions during spaceflights might be designed to reduce or prevent psychological and interpersonal problems. Space mission crews have been evaluated by communication with mission control (Gushin et al., 1997; Kanas, 1991) by means of speech analysis which included intonational and time characteristics (duration of communication sessions, talking speed, and silences) and themes discussed. Analyses of communication sessions have provided empirical evidence for the appearance of several factors which are assumed to reflect the psychological climate within the crew and which affect the interaction between them and outside personnel. For example, such factors have included psychological closing, a tendency of crew members to avoid sharing their feelings with others, and information filtration in crew communication (Gushin et al., 1996).

For personnel working under hazardous conditions attention should be paid to

indicators of wakefulness and awareness, for example, overt behavior,

electoencephalographic

recordings, and neuropsychological

tests. Ursin et al. (i 991)

have emphasized the importance of registering deviations and indications of a breakdown

Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin

-7-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

in group organization and coherence, because serious psychological difficulties may necessitate the evacuation of personnel or termination of the project.
To distinguish significant psychological deviations from the norm requires previously obtained reference data for each individual that record normal variations in any given behavioral parameter (Hockey, 1992). There is an inherent difficulty when monitoring performance in that the error thresholds must be operationally meaningful. Is the performance "good enough," even if there is a variance from baseline? The more "central" responses (mood, memory, attention) are best measured by specially designed tasks that reflect changes in working memory and control processing, as opposed to automatic processing. There seems to be limited value in using standard measurements of reaction time (e.g., Steinberg test); they are not sensitive to changes in capacity or mental state, but reflect mainly stable differences between individuals. Any change in such capabilities may reflect a general loss of motivation (Hockey, 1992).
Reliable questionnaires, which have been tested for reliability, validity, and acceptance, are available for use in evaluating mood, motivation, cognitive factors, and subjective health complaints (Ursin et al., 1991). The transfer of information directly to the individual in a digested, positive, and understandable form, is a primary element in all applications of contemporary psychological principles. Also, corrective action should be instigated by the affected person, if possible. Therefore, the corrective information should be fed back clearly to the individual as soon as possible. An essential part of the social group observation system's self-evaluation of each group member's performance and function is that the self-evaluations may be compared with those made by the other group members.

CONCLUSIONS

From experience with those in confined environments, it seems reasonable to conclude that psychological countermeasures are key factors for use in any long-duration confinement program. They are most effective when they are specifically designed for the demands of a given mission, and when they address not only the crew or the test subjects, but their families, key external personnel, and those conducting the test. Efficient countermeasures include appropriate selection, composition, training, and support of the test participants.

Sandal, Va_rnes, and Ursin

-8-

"

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

REFERENCES

Baade, E., Halse, K., Stenhammer, P. E., Ellertsen, B., Johnsen, T. B., and Vollmer, Psychological Tests. In Psychobiology of Stress: A Study of Coping Men, edited Ursin, E. Baade, and S. Levine, Academic Press: New York, 1978, pp. 125-160.

F. by H.

Bergan, T., V_emes, R. J., Ingebrigsten, P., T_nder, O., Aakvaag, A., and Ursin, H. Relationships between work environmental problems and health among Norwegian divers in the North Sea. In Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine, edited by A. Marroni and G. Oriani, EUBS: Palermo, 1987, pp. 327-336.

Chidester, T. R., Helmreich, R. L., Gregorich, E. and Geis, C. E. Pilot personality and crew coordination: implications for training and selection. Int. J. Aviat. PsychoI. 1: 25-44, 1991.

Cohen, S., Evans, G. W., Stokels, D., and K.rantz, D. Stress and the Environment. Putnam: New York, 1986.

CoUet, J., Gharib, C. I., Kirsch, K., and Va_rnes, R. J. Scientific results from the ISEMSI experiment. ESA Bull. 17: 483-487, 1991.

Endressen, I., Vgemes, R. J., Ursin, H., and T_nder, O. Psychological

concentrations of immunoglobulins

and complement components

nurses. Work Stress 4: 365-375, 1989.

stress factors and in Norwegian

Foushee, H. C. The role of communication,

the maintenance 1981.

of crew coordination.

socio-psychology,

and personality factors in

Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 53:1062-1066,

Foushee, H. C., and Manos, K. L. Information transfer within the cockpit: problems in intracockpit communication. In Information Transfer Problems in the Aviation System, NASA TR-1875, edited by C. E. Billings and E. S. Cheaney, 1981.
Gushin, V. I., Kholin, S. F., and Ivanovsky, Y. R. Soviet psychophysiological investigations of simulated isolation. In Advances in Space Biology and Medicine, edited by S. Bonting, JAI Press, Inc: London, 1993, pp. 5-14.
Gushin, V. I., Kolintchenko, V. A., Efimov, V. A., Davies, C. Psychological evaluation and support during EXEMSI. In Advances in Space Biology and Medicine, edited by S. Bonting, JAI Press Inc.: London, 1996, pp. 283-296.
Gushin, V. I., Zaprisa, T. B., Kolintchenko, V. A., Efimov, A., Smirnova, T. M., Vinokhodova, A. G., and Kanas, N. Content analysis of the crew communication with external communicants under prolonged isolation. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 12: 1093-1098, 1997.

Sandal, V_ernes, and Ursin

-9-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

Harrison, A., Clearwater, Y. A., and McKay, C. P. The human experience in Antarctica: applications to life in space. Behav. Sci. 34: 253-271, 1990.
Helmreich, R. L. Applying psychology in outer space: unfulfilled promises revisited. Am. Psychol. 38: 445-450, 1983.

Helmreich, R. L., and Wilhelm, J. A. The undersea habitat as a space station analog:

evaluation of research and training potential, NASA/University

of Texas Report,

1985, pp. 85-87.

Hockey, G. R. J. Report of working group Monitoring in Space: Space Psychology European Space Agency LTPO-SR92-01,

on maintenance Days 2, edited
Paris, 1992.

of performance. In Integrated by A. W. H. Galliard,

Kanas, N. Psychological 355, 1991.

support for cosmonauts.

Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 63: 353-

King, R. E., and Flynn, C. F. Defining and measuring the "right stuff" --

neuropsychiatfic

flight screening. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 66:951-956,

1996.

Kragh, U. The Defense Mechanism Test: a new method for diagnosis and personnel selection. J. Appl. Psychol. 44: 303- 309, 1960.
Kragh, U. Prediction of success of Danish attack divers by the Defense Mechanism Test (DMT). Percept. Mot. Skills 15: 103-106, 1962.

Lazarus, R. S., Averill, J. R., and Opton, E. M. The psychology of coping: Issues of research and assessment. In Coping and Adaptation, edited by G. V. Coelho, D. A. Hamburg, and J. E. Adams. Basic Books: New York, 1974.

Levine, S., and Ursin, H. What is stress? In Stress-Neurobiology

Neuroendocrinology,

edited by M. R. Brown, G. F. Koob,

Dekker: New York, 1991.

and and C. Rivier,

Marcel

Maki, P., Pettersen, R., Olff, M., Sandal, G., Wamcke, M., and Ursin, H. Collection of normative data: Psychodynamics under stress. WP 640. In Definition of Psychological Testing of Astronaut Candidates for Columbus Missions, edited by K. M. Goeters and C. Fassbender, European Space Agency, 9730/90/NLflW,

Manzey, D, Schiewe, A., and Fassbender, C. Psychological countermeasures

for

extended manned spaceflights. Acta Astronautica 35: 339- 361, 1995.

McClelland, D. C., Davidson, R. J., Floor, E., and Saron, C. Stresses power motivation, sympathetic activation, immune function and illness. J. Hum. Stress 6: 6-15, 1980.

Sandal, Vaernes, and Ursin

-10-

b"

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

McFadden, T. J., Helmreich, R., Rose, R. M., and Fogg, L. F. Predicting astronauts effectiveness: a multivariat approach. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 65: 904-909, 1994.
Neuman, T. Dimensionering och validering av perceptgenesen for forsvarsmekanismer. En hierarkisk analys mot pilots stress beteende. FOA Report No. 55020-H6, Sweden, 1978.

Nicholas, J. M., and Foushee, H. C. Organization, selection, and training of crews for

extended spaceflight: findings from analogs and implications. 456, 1990.

J. Spacecraft 27: 451-

Palinkas, L. A., Johnson, J. C., Boster, A. S., and Houseal, M. Longitudinal studies of

behavior and performance Med. 69: 73-77, 1998.

during a winter at the South Pole. Aviat. Space Environ.

Rachman, S. J. Psychological analyses of courageous performance in military personnel. Defense Technical Information Center; Alexandria, Rept. ARI-RN-91-86, VA, 1991.

Reily, V. Psychoneuroendocrine

influences in immunocompetence

Science 212:1100-1109,

1981.

and neoplasia.

Rivolier, J. L'homme darts l'espace: Une approche psycho-rcologique Presses Universitaires de France: Paris, 1997.

des vols habiturs.

Rohrer, J. Interpersonal relationships in isolated small groups. In Psychological Aspects

of Manned Spaceflight, 1961.

edited by B. Flaherty, Columbia University

Press: New York,

Sandal, G. M. Crew tension during a space station simulation. in press.

Environ. Behav., 2000a,

Sandal, G. M. Coping in Antarctica: Is it possible to generalize across environments? Aviat. Space Environ. Med., 2000b, in press.

Sandal, G. M., Bergan, T., Warncke, M., V_rnes, R. J., and Ursin, H. Pychological reactions during polar expeditions and isolation in hyperbaric chambers. Aviat. Environ. Med. 67: 227-234, 1996.

Space

Sandal, G. M., Endresen, I., Va_rnes, R., and Ursin, H. Personality and coping strategies during submarine missions. Mil. Psychol. 11: 381-403, 1999.

Sandal, G. M., Groenningsaeter,

H., Eriksen, H. R., Gravraakmo, A., Birkeland,

Ursin, H. Personality and endocrine activation in military stress situations.

Psychol. 10: 45-61, 1998.

K., and Mil.

Sandal, Va:rnes, and Ursin

-I 1-

Psycho-Sociological

Aspects of Confinement Deconditioning

Sandal, G. M., Vaernes, R., and Ursin, H. Interpersonal relations in space simulation studies. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 66: 617-624, 1995.

Santy, P. Choosing the Right Stuff" the Psychological Cosmonauts. Prager: London, 1994.

Selection of Astronauts and

Suedfeld, P. Extreme and unusual environments. In Handbook of Environmental

Psychology, 863-886.

Vol. 1, edited by D. Stokols and I. Altman, Wiley: New York, 1987, pp.

Suedfeld, P., and Steel, G. D. The environmental Rev. Psychol., 2000, in press.

psychology of capsule habitats. Annu.

Ursin, H., Endresen, I. M., Svebak, S., Tellnes, G., and Mykletun, R. Muscle pain and coping with working life in Norway: a review. Work Stress 7: 247-258, 1993.

Ursin, H., Mykletun, R., Tonder, O., V_ernes, R. J., Relling, G., Isaksen, E., and Murison,

R. Psychological stress-factors and concentrations of immunoglobulins

and

complement components in humans. Scand. Psychol. 23: 340-347, 1984.

Ursin, H., V_ernes, R., Endresen, I. M., and Wamcke, M. Physiological and psychological aspects of living in confined space under strenuous conditions. Polar Record, Polar Symposia 1: 39-42, 1991.

Scott

V_ernes, R. J. The Defense Mechanism Test predicts inadequate performance stress. Scand. J. PhysioL 23: 37-43, I982.

under

V_ernes, R. J., and Darragh, A. Endocrine metres hyperbaric pressure: correlations Physiol. 23: 193-199, 1982.

reactions and cognitive performance with perceptual defense reactions.

at 60 Scand. J.

V_ernes, R. J., Knardahl, S., Ursin, H., and R_msing, J. Relations between environmental problems, psychology and health among shift-workers in the Norwegian processindustry. Work Stress 2: 7-15, 1988.
V_ernes, R. J., Myhre, G., Aas, H., Homnes, T., Hansen, I., and Tonder, O. Relationships between stress, psychological factors, health, and immune levels among military aviators. Work Stress 5: 5-16, 1991.

V_ernes, R. J., Wamcke, M., Eidsvik, S., Aakvaag, A., Tonder, O., and Ursin, H. Relationships between perceived health and psychological factors among submarine personnel: endocrine and immunological effects. In Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine, edited by A. Marroni and G. Oriani, EUBS: Palermo, 1987, pp. 19-28.
Wolfe, T. The Right Stuff Farrar, Straus and Giroux: New York, 1979.

Sandal, Vaernes, and Ursin

-12-

Ą_

2. PHYSIOLOGICAL

CONSEQUENCES

OF DECONDITIONING

IN

PHYSICALLY

ACTIVE

POPULATIONS

James E. Graves', Lori L. Ploutz-Snyder',

and Michael L. Pollock t

Exercise cannot secure us from that dissolution to which we

are decreed; but while the soul and body continue united, it

can make the association pleasing, and give probable hopes

that they shall be disjoined by an easy separation...to die is

the fate of man; but to die with lingering anguish is

generally his folly.

SAMUEL JOHNSON

INTRODUCTION

Physically active individuals enjoy a variety of health and fitness benefits that

foster disease prevention, improve functional capacity of the body, and enhance the

quality of life. Specific health benefits include reduced incidence of cardiovascular

disease, colon cancer, obesity, diabetes, and osteoporosis, and improved mental health

(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996). Specific fitness benefits include

development and maintenance of cardiorespiratory

capacity, muscular strength and

endurance, flexibility, and a healthy level of body composition. These improvements in

physical fitness enhance one's ability to complete the activities of daily living, preserve

the maintenance of independent living, reduce the risk of falling in the elderly, and

contribute to athletic performance at all levels of competition.

Physiological adaptations that result from participation in physical activity are specific to the type of activity performed (McArdle, Katch, and Katch, 1991). Aerobic exercise training (e.g., walking, jogging, stair-climbing) develops cardiorespiratory capacity and the ability to participate in continuous activity such as aerobic endurance exercise. Resistance exercises (weightlifting or calisthenics) are anaerobic and promote increased muscular strength (the ability to exert force), muscular endurance (resistance to fatigue), and the development and maintenance of muscle mass which contributes to a healthy body composition. In recognition of exercise specificity, exercise professionals recommend participation in a well-rounded exercise program that includes aerobic exercise training, resistance exercise training, and exercises that improve flexibility (American College of Sports Medicine, 1998).

"Department of Health and Physical Education, Syracuse University, _Deceased

Syracuse, New York

Deconditioningin the PhysicallyActive
A key tenetfor improvingphysiologicfunctionthroughparticipationin physical activity is the principleof overload:the requirementhatphysicalactivity be performedat a level greaterthan"normal" to induceadaptation(McArdle,Katch,andKatch, 1991). Overloadis achievedby manipulationof exercisemode(type),frequency,intensity (level),duration,andoverall volumeof activity (AmericanCollegeof SportsMedicine, 1998).A moderateprogressionof overloadis requiredto elicit continuedadaptation duringa physicaltraining program.In habitually activepersonsandelite athletes, continuedprogressionmay eventuallyresultin increasedrisk of injury or "overtraining." Theseindividualsmaybenefitmostby exercisingata near-constanlet vel to maintaina desiredamountof fitnessasopposedto progressingin theirprogram,for further physical improvementin thesepeopleis usuallyminimal (Pollock andWilmore, 1990).
The benefitsof physicaltrainingarereversible(McArdle,Katch, andKatch, 1991;Neufer, 1989).Continuedparticipationat anappropriatelevel is requiredto maintainthe healthstatus,aswell asfunctionalcapacity.It is generallyrecognizedthat the healthandfitnessbenefitsof physicalactivity canbemaintainedwith a reduced training frequencyor reducedtraining volumeaslong asthe intensity(level) of the activity is not compromised(AmericanCollegeof SportsMedicine,1998).This is true for aerobicaswell asanaerobicactivity. Physiologicfunctionbecomescompromised aftera relatively shortperiod of time following reductionin exercisetraining intensityor cessationof training (detraining).
The lossof physiologicalfunctionduring a reductionin training intensityor detraining is referredto asdeconditioning.Deconditioningalsooccursin sedentary individuals during long-durationwater immersion,spaceflight,andbed rest (Greenleaf, 1997).In recentlytrainedindividuals,deconditioningmay leadto completereversalof physioIogicfunctionto or evenbelowpre-training,sedentarylevels.In highly trained athletessomeof thephysiologicbenefitof activity canberetainedduring deconditioning, althoughlong-term(greaterthan6 months)studiesof deconditioningin highly trained populationshavenot beenconducted.
In this chapterwe will reviewthe effectsof deconditioningon physiological functionin physicallyactivepopulations.Studiesof recentlytrainedindividualswill be consideredaswell asthosethathaveemployedlong-termtraining, andthoseutilizing highly trainedathletesM. ost investigatorshaveconcentratedon lossof functional capacityandon the responsiblemechanismsduringdeconditioning.Few studieshave addressedthe influenceofdeconditioningon healthstatus.The healthandfitnessbenefits of participationin physicalactivity arerelated(AmericanCollegeof SportsMedicine, 1998),andprotectionfrom diseaseis probablydecreaseduringdeconditioning (Greenleaf,Jacksona, ndLawless,1994).Following a descriptionof thephysiological consequenceosf detrainingon aerobicandresistanceexerciseconditioning,we will discussimplicationsof theprescriptionof exerciseto physicallyactiveindividuals in situationsthatmight leadto deconditioning.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-2-

EFFECT OF DECONDITIONING

Deconditioning in the Physically Active ON AEROBIC EXERCISE TRAINING

Cardiovascular

Consequences of Reduced Training

Aerobic exercise training results in an increased ability to utilize oxygen to improve physical (aerobic) performance. Mechanisms associated with these changes include both cardiovascular and metabolic adaptations (I-Iolloszy and Coyle, 1984). Cardiovascular adaptations to aerobic exercise training indicate that the maximal volume of oxygen that can be consumed (9 02 max typically measured during incremental exercise to exhaustion) is increased by aerobic exercise training as a result of an increased ability of the heart to pump a greater volume of blood (cardiac output) and the enhancement of exercising skeletal muscle to remove oxygen from the blood (Table 1). Maximal cardiac output increases primarily by an increase in the stroke volume (Saltin, 1969). However, the unchanged cardiac output during a given level ofsubmaximal exercise following training is achieved by a greater stroke volume and lower heart rate. In addition, the proportion of cardiac output delivered to exercising skeletal muscle following training increases because of increased vascularization of the capillary bed (Klausen, Anderson, and Pelle, 1981). Increased intracellular myoglobin (Pattengale and Holloszy, 1967) and aerobic enzymes (Bamard, Edgerton, and Peter, 1970; Kiessling, 1971) facilitate production of energy through aerobic metabolism.

Maximal oxygen consumption.

Maximal oxygen uptake (aerobic capacity) can be maintained in previously trained individuals when training frequency (Hickson and Rosenkoetter, 1981) or duration (Hickson et al., 1982) are reduced by as much as two-thirds, as long as training intensity is maintained. When training intensity decreases by one-third, however, 902 max declines dramatically (Hickson et aL, 1985). Unfortunately, maintenance of aerobic capacity with training does not continue forever, even when training intensity is maintained. Pollock et al. (1997) studied 21 50-year-old elite track athletes for 20 years. Nine of those athletes who continued to train at high intensity showed a 15°,6 reduction in _'O2 max over the 20-year period. The reduction in aerobic capacity for those nine individuals, however, was significantly less than the 34% reduction observed in those who greatly reduced their training intensity.

The magnitude of decline in 902 max during reduced training is related to the degree to which exercise intensity is compromised. A one-third reduction in training intensity resulted in a 4.2% to 5.8% decline in VO2 max, whereas a two-thirds reduction in intensity resulted in a 9.5% to 25.8% decline (Hickson et al., 1985). Interestingly, most of the decrease in 902 max occurs during the first 5 weeks of reduced training, regardless of the magnitude of the change in intensity (Hickson et al., 1985).

In physically active individuals who stop training, 902 max is reduced more rapidly. Coyle et al. (1984) reported a 7% reduction in _'O 2 max in highly trained

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-3-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active
distance runners and cyclists following just 12 days of detraining. This loss of aerobic capacity was accompanied by reduction in maximal cardiac output by 7%, in stroke volume by 10%, and in oxygen pulse by 11%. Aerobic capacity continued to decline by 16 % following 84 days of detraining which is of a magnitude similar to that observed during bed-rest deconditioning (Greenleaf, 1997). Thus, 902 max following detraining in those previously highly trained individuals was still 17% greater than that found in sedentary controls after 84 days of detraining. The slope of the change in VO2 max from 56 days to 84 days of detraining was negative, however, indicating that detraining continuing beyond 84 days would likely result in a still further decline in aerobic capacity.
Complete return of _'O2 max to pre-training values occurs after long-term (> 6 week) deconditioning in most populations including adult females (Fringer and Stull, 1974; Wang, Jen, and Chen, 1997), adolescent males (Fournier et al., 1982), and adult males (Miyashita, Haga, and Mizura, 1978; Simoneau et al., 1987). Data from Ready and Quinney (1982) are an exception in that alterations in the "anaerobic threshold" in males after 9 weeks of endurance training (80% "Q'O2max) resulted in incomplete return of aerobic capacity following 9 weeks of detraining. Moore et al. (1987) have also reported that when sedentary individuals participate in short-term (7 weeks), low-intensity training, the small gains in VO2 max may be retained for up to 3 weeks after training cessation.
The decline in _'O2 max during detraining is a result of a reduction in both cardiac output and arteriovenous 02 difference (Coyle et al., 1984; Coyle et al., 1985). Maximum cardiac output, however, is reduced within the first 12 days of detraining, whereas maximum arteriovenous 02 difference can be maintained during at least 21 days of detraining (Coyle et al., 1985).
Heart rate.
Since the heart rate (HR) of highly trained athletes at any relative (percent of maximal) exercise intensity (including the maximal level) increases during deconditioning (Coyle et al., 1984; Coyle et al., 1985; Martin et al., 1986; Michael, Evert, and Jeffers, 1972) the reduction in cardiac output must be caused by a reduction in stroke volume. In addition to a marked increase in maximal HR during deconditioning in highly trained athletes, HR recovery time increases following an acute bout of aerobic exercise (Michael, Evert, and Jeffers, 1972). Previously trained individuals show little change in maximal HR during training (Pollock and Wilmore, 1990) or during subsequent deconditioning (Fournier et al., 1982; Fringer and Stull, 1974). Thus, the reduction in maximum cardiac output during deconditioning in previously trained individuals must also be caused by a decline in stroke volume.
Stroke volume.
The reduction in stroke volume during deconditioning is associated with and may be caused in part by a decrease in heart mass. Ehsani, Hagberg, and Hickson (1978)

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-4-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

measured changes in left ventricular dimensions and mass aider aerobic conditioning and

deconditioning and observed complete loss of training-induced increases in ventricular

volume and myocardial wall thickness. Martin et al. (1986) reported similar findings in

trained endurance athletes, even though some training- induced adaptations were retained;

there was a high positive correlation (r > 0.80) between left ventricular end diastolic

dimension and stroke volume in all of their subjects. Despite many years of training, it

takes only several weeks of detraining to induce regression of left ventricular

hypertrophy. Whether training-induced adaptation of heart size and volume in highly

trained athletes regresses totally with detraining is not clear (Coyle, 1998). Training-

induced increase and subsequent detraining-induced

decrease ofventricular wall

thickness, volume, and mass are independent of age up to 65 years (Giada et al., 1998).

Ventilation.

Ventilatory function often parallels training-induced adaptations in _'O2 max. Maximum ventilatory volume declines and the ventilatory response to hypereapnia increases following long-term (2-year) detraining in highly trained athletes (Miyamura and Ishida, 1990). Short-term (10-day) detraining has no effect on ventilatory characteristics of trained distance runners, indicating that they may be protected to some extent against deterioration of ventilatory function during detraining (Cullinane et al., 1986). Ventilatory chemosensitivity is highly responsive to short-term (2-week) training in previously untrained subjects (Katayama et al., 1999).
Blood pressure.
Aerobic exercise training can cause acute and chronic reduction of systolic and diastolic blood pressure with the greatest changes occurring in hypertensive persons (Fagard and Tipton, 1994). Coyle, Hemmert, and Coggan (1986) found that mean blood pressure increased from 98 to 105 mmHg following 4 weeks of detraining in highly trained endurance athletes; this increase was associated with a 9.4% reduction in blood volume. When blood volume was expanded to trained levels by means of infusion of dextran, however, mean blood pressure was reduced from 105 to 100 mmHg, indicating that the reduction in pressure during short-term detraining is largely a result of hypovolemia. It appears that the reduced blood volume may limit ventricular filling during upright exercise, thereby compromising stroke volume and limiting cardiac output and _'O 2 max. Thus, the reduction in stroke volume during deconditioning is largely a result of hypovolemia and not of a deterioration of heart function (Coyle, 1998).
Capillary density.
Aerobic exercise training increases capillarization of the trained musculature which should enhance oxygen availability and metabolic waste removal by prolonging blood transit time and reducing diffusion distance (Coyle, 1998). Moderate training for 8 weeks elicits a 20% increase in the number of capillaries per square millimeter and per muscle fiber, and 8 weeks of detraining in these previously trained individuals results in complete reversal of those increases (Klausen, Anderson, and Pelle, 1981). Similar

Graves, ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-5-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active
findings have been reported by Schantz (1986) for previously untrained persons. However, Coyle et al. (1984) reported that capillarization of muscle did not change significantly following 84 days of detraining in highly trained endurance athletes; the number of capillaries per square millimeter and per muscle fiber not only remained unchanged during detraining, but were also 42 % to 50% greater than sedentary controls after detraining.

Metabolic Consequences of Deconditioning

Relative to the cardiovascular consequences of deconditioning, there are relatively

few data concerning the metabolic responses to deconditioning in physically active individuals. Aerobic training results in a variety of metabolic adaptations (Table 2) that

include enhanced fat utilization, carbohydrate sparing, and reduced lactate production

(Holloszy and Coyle, 1984). Increased utilization of carbohydrate during exercise after

deconditioning is indicated by a higher respiratory exchange ratio during exercise (Coyle

et al., 1985; Drinkwater and Horvath, 1972). Consistent with these findings is the

complete reversal of epinephrine stimulated lipolysis in men and women (Despres et aL,

1984) after 50 days of detraining. Hardman and Hudson (1994) also reported a reversal of

a training-induced

increase in high-density lipoprotein following 12 weeks of detraining.

These data have been obtained from recently trained individuals; data from habitually

active persons and highly trained athletes are lacking.

Carbohydrate utilization.

The increased utilization of carbohydrate during detraining in highly trained individuals results in an increased blood lactate concentration during submaximal

exercise at any given absolute or relative exercise intensity, and the lactate threshold

occurs at a lower percentage of "v'O2 max following deconditioning. Following 12 weeks

of detraining the lactate threshold was still higher than that of untrained controls (Coyle

et al., 1985). Similar results in recently trained individuals have been reported for men (Ready and Quinney, 1982) and women (Hardman and Hudson, 1994). The increased

utilization of carbohydrate following 84 days of detraining in highly trained endurance

athletes is associated with increases in lactate dehydrogenase, but in little or no change in

phosphofructokinase

or phosphorylase (Coyle et al., 1985). One important metabolic

adaptation to long-term aerobic exercise training is an increase in intracellular glycogen

whereas rapid reduction in muscle glycogen during deconditioning occurs in highly trained swimmers and in well-trained endurance athletes (Costill et al., 1985; Madsen et

al., 1993).

Lipoprotein profile.

Two important health benefits of aerobic exercise training are a reduction in total cholesterol and an increase in the high-density lipoprotein (HDL) subfraction of total cholesterol; these responses may reduce the risk of developing cardiovascular disease (Pollock and Wilmore, 1990). Motoyama et al. (1995) observed a reversal of training-

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-6-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active
induced improvements in total and HDL cholesterol following 1 month of detraining in recently trained elderly (75 year old) men and women. However, Cerioli, Tirelli, and Bonetti (1995) found no change in total or HDL cholesterol after 1 month of detraining in marathon runners.
Oxidative enzymes.
In a variety of highly trained athletes there are decreases of 40% in citrate synthase, 13-hydroxyacil-CoA dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, and succinate dehydrogenase activities following 4 to 12 weeks of detrainm" g (Allen, 1989; Amigo et al., 1998; Chi et aI., 1983; Coyle et al., 1984; Coyle et al., 1985) reported that the decline in oxidative enzyme activity during detraining occurred primarily in slow-twitch muscle fibers; fast-twitch fibers could maintain a much higher proportion of their traininginduced activity. Although the influence of long-term deconditioning on mitochondrial ATP production is unknown, from the general reduction in aerobic enzyme activity it would seem that mitochondrial ATP production would be diminished as well. Indeed, Wibom et al. (1992) reported that both mitochondrial ATP production and mitochondrial enzyme activities decreased following 3 weeks of detraining in recently trained subjects.
Hormonal regulation.
Hormonal regulation of metabolic activity occurs during exercise training and deconditioning. There is little or no effect on circulating catecholamines during shortterm detraining (Coyle et aI., 1985; Mikines et al., 1989a; Mikines et al., 1989b); an exception is the reduction in insulin sensitivity (Houmard et al., 1993; Mikines et al., 1989a; Mikines et al., 1989b). Accompanying long-term detraining is increased catecholamine concentrations during submaximal exercise at the same absolute intensity, and reduced concentrations at the same relative intensity (Coyle et al., 1985).
Resting metabolic rate.
Short-term (3-week) detraining in previously trained men does not reduce resting metabolic rate (RMR). LaForgia et al. (1999) measured the percentages of body fat and fat-free mass and RMR in eight pairs of male subjects (matched for age, body mass, and training volume) allocated to a normal training group or a detraining group. Although the detraining group showed a slight reduction in fat-free mass (0.7 kg) relative to controls, there were no significant changes in RMR following 3 weeks of detraining.
Consequences for Athletic Performance
The physiological consequences of detraining result in a reduction of athletic performance. As mentioned previously, the specific health and fitness benefits from participation in physical activity are reversible, and a trained endurance athlete's performance will decline rapidly when the detraining stimulus is insufficient. Data from competitive swimmers (Claude and Sharp, 1991; Mujika et at., 1995) and distance

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-7-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

runners (Coyle, Hemmert, and Coggan, 1986; Houmard et al., 1992; Houmard 1993; Madsen et aL, 1993) have indicated reductions in endurance performance following detraining periods of various durations. Madsen et aL, (1993) found

et al., a 21%

reduction in time-to-exhaustion

following just 4 weeks of detraining in well-trained

endurance athletes, even though the detraining had no effect on VO 2 max; women

exhibited a reduction in both _'O2 max and in time-to-exhaustion

following just 2 weeks

of detraining (Ready, Eynon, and Cunningham, 1981). These data indicate that aerobic

endurance performance is rapidly compromised in both highly trained and recently

trained persons. Because Ready, Eynon, and Cunningham's (1981) subjects were able to

retain 24% to 38% of their training adaptation for exhaustion time and _'O2 max, and

because Houmard et al. (1996) found no significant reduction in exercise time-to-

exhaustion following 2 weeks of detraining in previously sedentary subjects, it can be presumed that performance can be maintained for up to 2 weeks during detraining.

EFFECT OF DECONDITIONING

ON RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING

Reduced training volume is a decrease in intensity, duration, or frequency of

exercise relative to a normal level. Reasons for reducing training volume include both

planned variations in training, as well as injuries and illnesses. Volume reductions are

individual-specific

in that a large reduction in one individual might be a small decrease or

even an increase for another; for example, one person might reduce his training from 5

days to 3 days per week, whereas another might reduce it from 7 days to 3 days per week.

Although both are now exercising 3 days per week, the relative magnitude of reduction is

different and thus the magnitude of physiological adaptation will likely be different.

Clearly, the magnitude of adaptation in response to reduced training is determined by the

duration and extent of detraining, with longer duration and more severe reductions in

exercise leading to the larger magnitude of responses.

Functional Consequences of Reduced Training

Strength.

Progressive resistance exercise training induces increases in strength, the initial

improvements being chiefly a result of neural factors since changes in muscle mass may

take many weeks. The most obvious functional adaptation to a reduction in resistance

training volume is a decrease in strength that occurs regardless of testing method or type

of contraction. When sedentary or recreationally active individuals must reduce their

exercise volume because they have to use crutches, rapid strength losses of 0.5% to 0.6%

per day occur (Adams, Hather, and Dudley, 1994; Berg et a/., 1991 ; Hather et a/., 1992a;

Ploutz-Snyder et al., 1995). Alternatively, when resistance-trained

athletes undergo

detraining in which all formal exercise training ceases, yet maintain ambulatory function,

strength losses of only 0.3% per day occur (Narici et al., 1989). These differences in

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-8-

Dcconditioning in the Physically Active

strength response between sedentary and trained individuals may be determined initial levels of muscular fitness and the extent of the exercise reduction.

by their

Even after 8-12 weeks of detraining, athletes still maintain greater strength when

compared with their pre-training status (Hakkinen, Alen, and Komi, 1985; Hakkinen and

Komi, 1985a; Hakkinen and Komi, 1985b; Hakkinen and Komi, 1983b; Houston et aL,

1983). Detrained strength levels tend to be higher than pre-trained levels, even when the

training and detraining periods are similar in length, suggesting that increases may occur

more rapidly than decreases in strength. It is important to note that strength levels are

retained above pre-training levels, even alter long periods of detraining. Staron et aL

(1991) have shown that 20 weeks of resistance training in women resulted in increases of

67% to 148% in strength (depending on the exercise) and that following 30 to 32 weeks

of detraining, strength was still significantly higher than pre-training values. However,

there were significant decreases in one-repetition maximum strength in the leg press (-32%)

and knee extension (-29%), but not in squat exercise (-13%) when detrained values were

compared with post-training values. This suggests that detraining strength decrements are

not consistent in all muscle groups and exercise types. The rate of strength loss varies by

muscle group and length and type of prior training. For example, training with only

concentric contractions results in a more rapid detraining effect when compared with

normal concentric/eccentric

training, even when training volume is controlled (Colliander

and Tesch, 1992; Dudley et al., 1991). However, training with only eccentric

contractions results in a normal or even slower than normal detraining effect, at least over

8 weeks (Housh et al., 1996).

The findings discussed thus far relate to cessation of resistance training. There are few data on the effects of reduced training volume on muscular strength; what data are available indicate that strength can be maintained following training by reducing the frequency of exercise to only one session per week as long as intensity and duration are maintained (Berger, 1962; Graves, Pollock, and Bryant., 1998; Hakkinen et al., 1990). It has even been suggested that the frequency can be reduced to one session every 2 or 4 weeks with minimal effect on strength, at least on the lumbar muscles (Tucci et aL, 1992).
Power.

Power is force x velocity; therefore to achieve high muscular power one must

exert high force or high velocity. Resistance training induces an increase in muscle

power, but strength decreases with detraining. If vertical jump or jump-squat performance

is a gross measure of power, then changes in jump performance should mirror changes in

strength. Alter 12 weeks of detraining following resistance training, vertical jump

performance was approximately equal to pre-training levels (Hakkinen and Komi,

1985a). However, alter stretch-shortening

cycle training, vertical jump performance was

increased by 10% above pre-training levels even after 12 weeks of detraining (Hakkinen

and Komi, 1985a). There is some evidence that power declines more quickly than

strength with detraining; collegiate swimmers showed no decline in shoulder strength

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-9-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

following 4 weeks of detraining, but had an 8% to 14% decline in swimming power during the same detraining period (Wilmore and Costill, 1988).

Vulnerability to delayed-onset muscle soreness.

Performance of high-intensity, different or unusual eccentric muscle contraction causes delayed-onset muscle soreness, microscopic tissue damage, and muscle

dysfunction. Recreationally active individuals are especially vulnerable to delayed-onset

muscle soreness following 5 weeks of muscle unloading caused by using crutches

(Ploutz-Snyder et al., 1996). Maximal eccentric contractions are usually required to induce delayed-onset muscle soreness; however, even submaximal eccentric contraction

can induce muscle soreness following a period of unloading. It is possible that this soreness would be observed, to a lesser extent, in strength-trained athletes who have

undergone long detraining periods. Concentric-resistance

exercise training without an

eccentric component renders individuals more vulnerable to delayed-onset muscle

soreness and dysfunction when compared with no training at all (Ploutz-Snyder, Tesch,

and Dudley, 1998; Whitehead et al., 1998). Therefore, athletes who are performing only concentric exercise training, which is common during rehabilitation, are at greater risk of

muscle soreness and dysfunction following the detraining-rehabilitation

program. For

this reason, it is critical that rehabilitation programs include an eccentric exercise

component, regardless of the training status of the individual.

Physiological Consequences of Reduced Training

Functional adaptations to reduced training are induced by the morphological and physiological changes that occur in skeletal muscle with reduced use. The strength loss

can be explained both by muscle fiber atrophy and associated neural changes related to

recruitment of the muscle fibers. Velocity and power adaptations may be induced by

changes in enzyme and mitochondrial concentrations, and by changes in capillary

density. From an athletic performance perspective it is easy to view decreases in strength

and power as negative factors or maladaptations.

However, from a physiologic

perspective the decline in strength and power with disuse or reduced training are perfectly

normal physiological responses. Muscle is a metabolically expensive tissue and the body

is well suited to rapidly adjust the quantity.and placed upon it.

quality of the muscle to match the demand

Muscle atrophy.

Resistance exercise training induces increases in muscle size, both in single fibers and in whole muscle. Conversely, detraining induces muscle atrophy which is a reduction in skeletal muscle size. Decreases in strength are usually accompanied by muscle fiber atrophy (Hakkinen, Alen, and Komi, 1985; Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981; Hortobagyi et aL, 1993). There is some evidence that type II muscle fibers atrophy more quickly than type I fibers when there is detraining in strength-trained individuals (Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981; Hather et al., 1992a; Staron et al., 1991) because

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-I 0-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

many strength training programs induce marked type II fiber hypertrophy. Changes in muscle fiber types, particularly for short-term detraining periods, are unclear because there is little atrophy, and the muscle biopsy and fiber-area measurement techniques have a variability of±10%.

Neural changes.

Resistance training induces neural changes that rapidly facilitate force output.

Increases in strength and integrated electromyographic

(iEMG) activity at maximal

voluntary contraction are commonly observed following training and can be reversed

with detraining. Generally, maximal iEMG decreases as strength declines during

detraining periods (Hakkinen, Alert, and Komi, 1985; Hakkinen and Komi, 1983a;

Houston et aL, 1983; Narici et aL, 1989). These neural responses represent changes in

motor unit firing rate and synchronization and occur early in training/detraining

programs.

Capillary density.

Capillary density after training and detraining using either concentric exercise

only or a combination of concentric plus eccentric exercise training (Dudley et al., 199 I;

Hather et al., 1992b) indicates that both forms of training increase the number of

capillaries per muscle fiber (capillary density) and that the increase can be maintained

above pre-training levels throughout 4 weeks of detraining. Concentric-only training

increases the number of capillaries per cross-sectional area of muscle, and this increase

can be maintained during 4 weeks of detraining. This finding was a result of attenuated

muscle hypertrophy and increased capillary density with concentric-only training

compared with normal concentric-plus-eccentric

training.

Body composition.

Although muscle atrophy occurs following detraining, it is not associated with changes in the percentage of body fat (Hakkinen, Alert, and Komi, 1985; Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981; Hortobagyi et al., 1993; Staron et al., 1991). This may be because the variability in the measurement of lean-body mass and body-fat content is greater than the magnitude of the atrophy.

Insulin sensitivity.

Strength-trained individuals have a greater physiologic response to a given amount of insulin (insulin sensitivity) than their sedentary counterparts (Fujitani et al., 1998). Resistance training itself increases whole-body insulin sensitivity in vulnerable populations such as the elderly, the glucose intolerant, and the diabetic (Eriksson et al., 1998; Miller et aI., 1994; Ryan et al., 1996). Furthermore, strength training is associated with increases in glucose transporter (GLUT-4) activity and whole-body insulin sensitivity (measured with an oral glucose tolerance test). After 14 days of detraining, whole-body insulin sensitivity was significantly reduced, but GLUT-4 content was

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-1 I-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

maintained at 100% of the post-training content (Houmard et al., 1993). The mechanism

for the detraining-induced

decrease in insulin sensitivity is unclear. Dolkas and Greenleaf

(1977) suggested that 1,020 kcal/day of exercise is necessary to offset hyperinsulinemia

induced by bed-rest deconditioning. Those people at risk for glucose intolerance (the

aged, pregnant, diabetic) should be aware that even short periods ofdetraining could

influence their glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity.

Hormone responses.

Short periods of detraining have not been associated with marked changes in

hormone activity that may be relevant for skeletal muscle function. For example, plasma

concentrations of follicle-stimulating

hormone, leuteinizing hormone, progesterone,

estradiol, and testosterone are unchanged with short-term detraining (Hakkinen, 1989; Hakkinen and Pakarinen, 1991; Hakkinen et al., 1985; Hakkinen et al., 1990). After

longer-term detraining (>12 weeks) decreases in plasma testosterone-cortisol

and

testosterone-sex-hormone-binding

globulin ratios parallel decreases in strength

(Hakkinen et aL, 1985). An increase in plasma testosterone facilitates muscle

hypertrophy and a decrease accompanies atrophy.

Consequences for Athletic Performance

The magnitude and extent of reduction in exercise training intensity or duration

will have an important effect on athletic and work performance. The most severe

reductions in training occur when trained people who are immobilized on crutches, by

casts, or by confinement to bed rest for extended periods of time lose significant muscle

mass and strength which can take months to recover (see chapter by Greenleai). A less

severe situation is that of highly trained people who discontinue exercise for an extended

time and suffer large decrements in strength and power which will translate into reduced

work performance. A more common deconditioning situation is that associated with

seasonal variation in training, such as happens when athletes discontinue training for the

summer. A recent study of adolescent soccer players reported increases in muscle

enzymes and fiber area over an 11-month training period, followed by decreases after a

summer (8-week) detraining period (Amigo et al., 1998). The decreases were in muscle

fiber cross-sectional area of Type I and Type II fibers, and in activities ofcreatine kinase,

citrate synthase, phosphofructokinase,

lactate dehydrogenase and aspartate

aminotransferase.

However, moderate detraining can also have positive effects. Many

athletes begin training for their sport with intense exercise; then, as the season progresses,

the training emphasis shifts from physical training to skill acquisition and practice that

employ tapering-off strategies. But as long as the exercise intensity is maintained, a

muscle requires only minimal stimulus to maintain strength and power. Thus such

tapering-off periods are not necessarily detrimental to performance; small decreases in

strength have been documented when resistance training programs were discontinued

with no detrimental effects on performance (Hoffman et al., 1991; Koutedakis, 1995;

Koutedakis et aL, 1992).

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-i 2-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Reduced volume or intensity of a training program can occur because of injury or

illness, or purposely before major competitions, a common practice among swimmers and

some track athletes. The tapering-off protocols of these athletes usually include a period

of overtraining early in the season followed by a period of reduced activity before

competition. The period of reduced activity is often associated with an even increased

intensity but with substantially reduced duration and frequency of exercise. Most types

of physical performance can be maintained for weeks, if intensity of training is

maintained. beneficial.

Indeed, in people who axe overtrained or tired, this approach can be quite

EXERCISE PRESCRIPTION INDIVIDUALS

FOR INJURED PHYSICALLY

ACTIVE

Specific rehabilitation protocols are beyond the scope of this chapter, but several factors can be discussed. Although a period of rest or detraining may negatively affect performance in the short-term, physical injury engenders short-term performance loss. Rehabilitation from an injury often does not require complete cessation of training, but rather a modification of training such as the water fitness and running programs often used by injured track athletes. The "unloading" effect of an aquatic environment allows for some rehabilitative exercise without excessive gravitational loading of vulnerable joints. More severe injuries such as those requiring surgery, bed rest, or complete disuse of a limb will result in more substantial levels of detraining and will usually require longer periods of rehabilitation. Following periods of disuse, such as being on crutches for several weeks, skeletal muscle is particularly vulnerable to injury from eccentric exercise overload. Therefore, exercise rehabilitation treatments must progress gradually to avoid reinjury, and eccentric exercise should be an integral part of a rehabilitation program, since training with only concentric contractions also produces vulnerability to injury from eccentric con.tractions. When applying both aerobic and anaerobic forms of exercise during rehabilitation there is, therefore, a fine balance between providing an adequate training stimulus and avoiding any reinjury.

SUMMARY

There are many health benefits associated with regular exercise training including

disease prevention, management of existing disease conditions, enhanced performance of

everyday activities and athletics, and improved psychosocial status. It follows that these benefits will likely be lost upon cessation of exercise. Few data are available on the time-

course of the loss of health benefits that occurs with detraining, for virtually all research

on detraining has focused on physiological and performance responses. These data generally show that the time-course and severity of loss depend on the extent of

detraining and the physiological system involved. Well-documented

physiological

responses to detraining include decreases in "v'O2 max, ventilatory function, lactate

threshold, capillary density, muscle enzyme content, muscle strength, power, mass and

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-13-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

performance. delayed-onset by continuing maintained.

Detraining causes increases in heart rate, blood pressure, vulnerability to

muscle soreness and hyperinsulinemia.

These responses may be minimized

some level of physical activity, especially if exercise intensity can be

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

- 14-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

REFERENCES

Adams, G. R., Hather, B. M., and Dudley, G. A. Effect of short-term unweighting on human skeletal muscle strength and size. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 65:1116-1121, 1994.

Allen, G. Physiological and metoblic changes with six weeks detraining. Med. Sport. 21: 4-9, 1989.

Aust. J. Sci.

American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM Position stand on the recommended quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory muscular fitness, and flexibility in adults. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 30: 975-991,

and 1998.

Amigo, N., Cadefau, J. A., Tarrados, N., and Cusso, R. Effect of summer intermission on skeletal muscle of adolescent soccer players. ,/. Sports Med. Phys. Fitness 38: 298304, 1998.

Barnard, R. J., Edgerton, V. R., and Peter, J. B. Effect of exercise of skeletal muscle. I. Biochemical and histochemical properties. J. Appl. Physiol. 28: 762-766, 1970.

Berg, H. E., Dudley, G. A., Haggmark, limb unloading on skeletal muscle 1882-1885, 1991.

T., Ohlsen, H., and Tesch, P. A. Effects of lower mass and function in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 70:

Berger, R. Effect of varied weight training programs on strength. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 33: I68-81, 1962.

Cerioli, G., Tirelli, F., and Bonetti, A. Lipoprotein Ateneo Parmense 66: 161-167, 1995.

(a): effect of detraining.

Acta Biomed.

Chi, M.M.-Y., Hintz, C. S., Coyle, E. F., Martin, W. H., III, Ivy, J. L., Nemeth, P. M., Holloszy, J. O., and Lowry, O. H. Effects of detraining on enzymes of energy metabolism in individual human muscle fibers. Am. J. Physiol. Cell. Physiol. 244: C276-C287, 1983.

Claude, A. B., and Sharp, L. B. The effectiveness maintaining aerobic fitness during detraining Res. 7: 17-20, 1991.

of cycle ergometer training in from competitive swimming. J. Swim.

Colliander, E., and Tesch, P. Effects of detraining following short term resistance training on eccentric and concentric muscle strength. Acta Physiol. Scand. 144: 23-29, 1992.

Costill, D. L., King, D. S., Thomas, R., et al. Effects of reduced training on muscular power in swimmers. Physician Sportsmed. 12: 94-101, 1985.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-15-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Coyle, E. F. Deconditioning and retention of adaptations induced by endurance training. In ACSM Resource Manual for Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription, 3rd ed. Williams & Wilkins: Baltimore, MD, 1998, pp. 189-194.

Coyle, E. F., Hemmert, M. K., and Coggan, A. R. Effects of detraining on cardiovascular responses to exercise: role of blood volume. J. Appl. Physiol. 60: 95-99, 1986.
Coyle, E. G., Martin, W. H., Bloomfield, S. A., Lowry, O. H., and Holloszy, J. O. Effects of detraining on responses to submaximal exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 59: 853-859, 1985.

Coyle, E. G., Martin, W. H., Sinacore, D. R., Joyner, M. J., Hagberg, J. O. Time course of loss of adaptations after stopping prolonged training. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 57: 1857-1864, 1984.

J. M., and Holloszy, intense endurance

Cullinane, E. M., Sady, S. P., Vadeboncoeur, Cardiac size and _'O2,_ do not decrease Sports Exerc. 18: 420-424, 1986.

L., Burke, M., and Thompson, P. D. after short-term exercise cessation. Med. Sci.

Despres, J. P., Bouchard, C., Savard, R., et al. Effects of exercise training and detraining on fat cell lipolysis in men and women. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 53: 25-30, 1984.

Dolkas, C., and Greenleaf, J. E. Insulin and glucose responses during bed rest with isotonic and isometric exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 43: 1033-1038, 1977.

Drinkwater, B., and Horvath, S. Detraining Exerc. 2: 91-95, 1972.

effects on young women. Med. Sci. Sports

Dudley, G. A., Tesch, P. A., Miller, B. J., and Buchanan, P. Importance of eccentric actions in performance adaptations to resistance training. Aviat. Space Environ. 62: 543-550, 1991.

Med.

Ehsani, A. A., Hagberg, J. M., and Hickson, R. C. Rapid changes in left ventricular dimensions and mass in response to physical conditioning and deconditioning. Cardiol. 42: 52-56, 1978.

Am. J.

Eriksson, J., Tuominen, J., Valle, T., Sundberg, S., Sovijarvi, A., Lindholm, H., Tuomilehto, J., and Koivisto, V. Aerobic endurance exercise or circuit-type resistance training for individuals with impaired glucose tolerance? Horm. Metab. Res. 30: 3741, 1998.
Fagard, R. H., and Tipton, C. M. Physical activity, fitness, and hypertension. In Physical Activity, Fitness, and Health: International Proceeding and Consensus Statement, edited by C. Bouchard, R. J. Shepard and T. Stephens, Human Kinetics: Champaign, IL, 1994, pp. 633-655.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-16-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Foumier, M., Ricci, J., Taylor, A., Gerguson, R. J., Montpeht, R. R., and Chaitman, B. R. Skeletal muscle adaptation in adolescent boys: sprint and endurance training and detraining. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 14: 453-456, 1982.
Fringer, M. N., and Stull, G. A. Changes in cardiorespiratory parameters during periods of training and detraining in young adult females. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 6: 20-25, 1974.

Fujitan, J., Higaki, Y., Kagawa, T., Sakamoto, M., Kiyonage,

A., Nakai, Y., Tokuyama, K., and Tanaka, H. Intravenous

derived glucose effectiveness 1998.

in strength-trained

humans.

A., Shindo, M., Taniguchi, glucose tolerance testMetabolism 47: 874-877,

Giada, F., Bertaglia, E., De Picolli, B., Franeeschi, M., Sartori, F., Raviele, A., and Pascotto, P. Cardiovascular adaptations to endurance training and detraining in young and older athletes. Int. J. Cardiol. 65: 149-155, 1998.

Graves, J. E., Pollock, M. L., and Bryant, C. Health and fitness assessment: muscular strength and endurance. In American College of Sports Medicine Resource Manual for Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription. Williams & Wilkins: Baltimore, MD, 1998, pp. 448-455.

Greenleaf, J. E. Intensive exercise training during bed-rest attenuates deconditioning. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 29: 207-215, 1997.

Greenleaf, J., Jackson, C., and Lawless, D. Immune response and function: exercise conditioning versus bed-rest and spaceflight deconditioning. Sports Med. Trng. Rehabil. 5: 223-241, 1994.

Hakkinen K. Neuromuscular and hormonal adaptations training. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 29: 9-26, 1989.

during strength and power

Hakkinen, K., Alert, M., and Komi, P. V. Changes in isometric force and relaxation-time,

electomyographic

and muscle fibre characteristics of human skeletal muscle during

strength training and detraining. Acta Physiol. Scand. 125: 573-585, 1985.

Hakkinen, K., and Komi, P. V. Changes in neuromuscular performance in voluntary and
reflex contraction during strength traning in man. Int. J. Sports Med. 4: 282-288, 1983a.

Hakkinen, K., and Komi, P. V. Electromyographic

changes during strength training and

detraining. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 15: 455-60, 1983b.

Hakkinen, K., and Komi, P. V. Changes in electrical and mechanical behavior of leg extensor muscles during heavy resistance strength training. Scand. J. Sport Sci. 7: 5564, 1985a.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-17-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Hakkinen, K., and Komi, P. V. Effect of explosive type strength training on

electromyographic

and force production characteristics of leg extensor muscles

concentric and various stretch-shortening

cycle exercises. Scand. ,I. Sport Sci.

7: 65-76, 1985b.

during

Hakkinen, K., Komi, P. V., and Tesch, P. A. Effect of combined concentric and eccentric strength training and detraining on force-time, muscle fiber and metabolic characteristics of leg extensor muscles. Scand. J. Sport Sci. 3: 50-58, 1981.

Hakkinen, K., and Pakarinen, A. Serum hormones in male strength athletes during intensive short term strength training. Eur. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 63:194-199, 1991.

Hakkinen, K., Pakarinen, A., Alen, M., and Komi, P. V. Serum hormones during prolonged training of neuromuscular performance. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 53: 287-293, 1985.

Hakkinen, K., Pakarinen, A., Kyrolainen, H., Cheng, Neuromuscular adaptations and serum hormones training. Int. J. Sports Med. 11: 91-98, 1990.

S., Kim, D. H., and Komi, P. V. in females during prolonged

Hardman, A. E., and Hudson, A. Brisk walking and serum lipid and lipoprotein in previously sedentary women - effect of 12 weeks of regular brisk walking by 12 weeks of detraining. Br. ,I. Sports Med. 28: 261-266, 1994.

variables followed

Hather, B. M., Adams, G. R., Tesch. P. A., and Dudley, G.A. Skeletal muscle responses to lower limb suspension in humans. ,Z. Appl. Physiol. 72: 1493-1498, 1992a.

Hather, B., Tesch, P. A., Buchanan, P., and Dudley, G.A. Influence of eccentric actions on skeletal muscle adaptations to resistance training. Acta Physiol. Scand. 143:17785, 1992b.

Hickson, R. C., Foster, C., Pollock, M. L., Galassi, T. M., and Rich, S. Reduced training intensities and loss of aerobic power, endurance, and cardiac growth. J. Appl. Physiol. 58: 492-499, 1985.

Hickson, R. C., Kanakis, C., Jr., Davis, J. R., Moore, A. M., and Rich, S. Reduced training duration effects on aerobic power, endurance, and cardiac growth..].. Appl. Physiol. 53: 225-229, 1982.

Hickson, R. C., and Rosenkoetter, M. A. Reduced training frequencies and maintenance of increased aerobic power. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 13: 13-16, 1981.

Hoffman, J., Fray, A., Howard, R., Maresh, C. M., and Kraehmer, W. J. Strength, speed, and endurance changes during the course of a Division I basketball season, or. Appl. SportSci. Res. 5: 144-149, 1991.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

- 18-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Holloszy, J. O., and Coyle, E. F. Adaptations of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise and their metabolic consequences. J AppL Physiol. 56: 831-838, 1984.

Hortobagyi, T., Houmard, J. A., Stevenson, J. R., Fraser, D. D, Johns, R. G. The effects of detraining on power athletes. Med. Sci. Sports 935, 1993.

R. A., and Israel, Exerc. 25: 929-

Houmard, J. A., Hortobagyi, T., Johns, R. A., Bruno, N. J., Nute, C. C., Shinebarger, M. H., and Wellborn, J. W. Effect of short-term training cessation on performance measures in distance runners. Int. ,I. Sports Med. 13: 572-576, 1992.

Houmard, J. A., Hortobagyi, T., Neufer, P. D., Johns, R. A., Fraser, D. D., and Israel, R. G. Training cessation does not alter GLUT-4 protein levels in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 74: 776-781, 1993.

Houmard, J. A., Tyndall, G. L., Midyette, J. B., et al. Effect training cessation on insulin action and muscle GLUT-4. 1168, 1996.

of reduced training and J. Appl. Physiol. 81:1162-

Housh, T., Housh, D. J., Weir, J. P., and Weir, L. L. Effects of eccentric-only training and detraining, lnt. ,I. Sports Med. 17: 145-148, 1996.

resistance

Houston, M. E., Fooese, E. A., Valeriote, S. P., Green, H. G., and Ramey, D.A. Muscle performance, morphology and metabolic capacity during strength training and detraining: a one leg model. Eur. ,Ł. Appl. Physiol. 51: 25-35, 1983.

Katayama, K., Sato, Y., Morotome, Y., Shima, N., Ishida, K., Mori, S., and Miyamura,

M. Ventilatory chemosensitive adaptations to intermittent hypoxic exposure with

endurance training and detraining, or. Appl. Physiol. 86:1805-1811,

1999.

Kiessling, K. Effects of physical training on ultrastructural features in human skeletal muscle. In Muscle Metabolism during Exercise, edited by B. Pemow and B. Saltin, Plenum Press: New York, 1971.

Klausen, K., Andersen, L. B., and Pelle, I. Adaptive muscle capillarization and enzyme levels during Scand. 113: 9-16, 1981.

changes training

in work capacity, skeletal and detraining. Acta Physiol.

Koutedakis, Y. Seasonal variation in fitness parameters in competitive Med. 19: 373-392, 1995.

athletes. Sports

Koutedakis, selected 1992.

Y., Boreham, physiological

C., Kabitsis, C., and Sharp, N. C. Seasonal deterioration of variables in elite male skiers. Int. J. Sports Med. 13: 548-551,

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

- 19-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

LaForgia, J., Withers, C. G., and Leney, body composition

R. T., Williams, A. D., Murch, B. J., Chatterton, B. E., Schultz, F. Effect of 3 weeks of detraining on the resting metabolic rate and of trained males. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 53: 126-133, 1999.

Madsen, K., Pedersen, P. K., Djurhuus, M. S, and Klitgaard, N. A. Effects of detraining on endurance capacity and metabolic changes during prolonged exhaustive exercise. ,I. Appl. Physiol. 75: 1444-1451, 1993.
Martin, W. H., Coyle, E. F., Bloomfield, S. A., and Ehsani, A. A. Effects of physical deconditioning after intense endurance training on left ventricular dimensions and stroke volume. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 7: 982-989, 1986.

McArdle, W., Katch, F., and Katch, V. Exercise Physiology." Energy, Nutrition, and Human Performance. Lea and Febiger: Philadelphia, PA, 1991.
Michael, E., Evert, J., and Jeffers, K. Physiological changes of teenage girls during five months of detraining. Med. Sci. Sports 4: 214-218, 1972.
Mikines, K. J., Sonne, B., Tronier, B., and Galbo, H. Effects of acute exercise and detraining on insulin action in trained men. J. Appl. Physiol. 66:704-711, 1989a.
Mikines, K. J., Sonne, B., Tronier, B., and Galbo, H. Effects of training and detraining on dose-response relationship between glucose and insulin secretion. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 256: E588-E596, 1989b.

Miller, J., Pratley, R. E., Goldberg, A. P., Gordon, S., and Hurley, B. F. Strength training increases

men. J. Appl. Physiol. 77:1122-1127,

1994.

P., Rubin, M., Treuth, M. S., Ryan, A. insulin action in healthy 50- to 65-yr-old

Miyamura, M., and Ishida, K. Adaptive changes in hypercapnic ventilatory response during training and detraining. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 60: 353-359, 1990.

Miyashita, M., Haga, S., and Mizura, T. Training and detraining effects on aerobic power in middle-aged and older men. J. Sports Med. 18: 131-137, 1978.

Moore, R. L., Thacker, E. M., Kelley, G. A., Musch, T. I., Sinoway,

and Dickinson, A.L. Effect of training/detraining

on submaximal

in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 63: 1719-1724, 1987.

L.I., Foster, V.L., exercise responses

Motoyama, M., Sunami, Y., Kinoshita, F., Irie, T., Saski, J., Arakawa, K., Kiyonaga, A., Tanaka, H., Shindo, M. The effects of long-term low intensity aerobic training and detraining on serum lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in elderly men and women. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 70: 126-131, 1995.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-20-

Deeonditioning in the Physically Active

Mujika, I., Chatard, J-C, Busso, T., Goyssant, A., Brale, F., and Lacoste, L., Effects of training on performance in competitive swimming. Can. ,Z. Appl. Physiol. 20: 395406, 1995.

Narici, M. V., Roi, G. S., Landoni, L., Minetti, A. E., and Cerretelli, P. Changes in force, cross-sectional area and neural activation during strength training and detraining of the human quadrieeps. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 59: 310-319, 1989.

Neufer, P. D. The effect of detraining and reduced training on the physiological adaptations to aerobic exercise training. Sports Med. 8:302-321, 1989.

Pattengale, P. K., and Holloszy, J.O. Augmentation of skeletal muscle myoglobin by programs of treadmill running. Am. J. PhysioL 213: 783-785, 1967.

Ploutz-Snyder,
unweighting 1995.

L. L., Tesch, P. A, Crittenden, D. J., and Dudley, on skeletal muscle use during exercise. J AppI.

G. A. Effect of Physiol. 79: 168-175,

Ploutz-Snyder, L. L., Tesch, P. A., and Dudley, G. A. Increased vulnerability exercise-induced dysfunction and muscle injury after concentric training. Med. Rehabil. 79: 58-61, 1998.

to eccentric Arch. Phys.

Ploutz-Snyder, dysfunction 777, 1996.

L. L., Tesch, P. A., Hather, B. M., and Dudley, and muscle injury after unloading. Arch. Phys.

G. A. Vulnerability to Med. Rehabil. 77: 773-

Pollock, M. L., Mengelkoch, L. J., Graves, J. E., Lowenthal, D. T., Limacher, M. C., Foster, C., and Wilmore, J. H. Twenty-year follow-up of aerobic power and body composition of older track athletes. J. Appl. Physiol. 82: 1508-1516, 1997.

Pollock, M. L., and Wilmore, J. H. Exercise in Health and Disease, 2nd ed. W. B. Saunders Co: Philadelphia, PA, 1990.

Ready, A. E., Eynon, R. B., and Cunningham, D. A. Effect of interval training and detraining on anaerobic fitness in women. Can. J Appl. Sport Sci. 6:114-118, 1981.

Ready, A. E., and Quinney, H. A. Alterations in anaerobic threshold as the result of endurance training and detraining. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 14: 292-296, 1982.

Ryan, A., Pratley, R., Goldberg, A.,and Elahi, D. Resistive training increases insulin

action in postmenopausal 1996.

women. Jr. Geront. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 51: M199-205,

Saltin, B. Physiological effects of physical conditioning. Med. Sci. Sports 1: 50-56, 1969.

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-21-

Deconditioning in the Physically Active

Schantz, P. G. Plasticity of human skeletal muscle with specific reference to effects of physical training on enzyme levels of the NADH shuttles and phenotypic expression of slow and fast myofibrillar proteins. Acta Physiol. Scand. 558: 1-62, 1986.

Simoneau, J-A, Lortie, G., Boulay, M. R., Marcotte, M., Thibault, M. C., and Bouchard,

C. Effects of two high-intensity intermittent training programs interspaced by

detraining on human skeletal musle and performance. 521, 1987.

Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 56:516-

Staron, R. S., Leonardi, M. J., Karapondo, D. L., Malicky, E. S., Falkel, J. E., Hagerman, F. C., and Hikida, R. S. Strength and skeletal muscle adaptations in heavy-resistancetrained women after detraining and retraining. 3. Appl. Physiol. 70:631-640, 1991.

Tucci, J. T., Carpenter, reduced frequency 1497-1501, 1992.

D. M., Pollock, M. L., Graves, J. E., and Leggett, S.H. Effect of of training and detraining on lumbar extension strength. Spine 17:

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical Activity and Health: A report of the Surgeon General. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Atlanta, GA, 1996.

Wang, J.-S., Jen, C. J., Chen, H.-I. Effects of chronic exercise and deconditioning on platelet function in women. J Appl. Physiol. 83: 2080-2085, 1997.

Whitehead, N. P., Allen, T. J., Morgan, D. L., and Proske, U. Damage to human muscle from eccentric exercise after training with concentric exercise. 3. Physiol. (Lond.) 15: 615 - 620, 1998.

Wibom, R. E., Hultman, E., Johansson, M., Matherei, K., Constantin-Teodosiu,

D., and

Schantz, P. G. Adaptation ofmitochondrial

ATP production in human skeletal muscle

to endurance training and detraining. 3. Appl. Physiol. 73: 2004-2010, 1992.

Wilmore, J. H., Costill, D. L. Training for Sport and Activity, The Physiological the Conditioning Process, 3rd ed., Human Kinetics: Champaign, IL, 1988.

Basis of

Graves, Ploutz-Snyder, and Pollock

-22-

,11-

i

·

3, IMMOBII,!ZATION

AND DISUSE MUSCULAR ATROPHY,

Shawn R. Simonson °

Under the spreading chestnut tree

The village smithy stands;

The smith, a mighty man is he,

With large and sinewy hands; And the muscles of his brawny arms

Are strong as iron bands... He earns whate'er he can,

And looks the whole world in the face,

For he owes not any man.

HENRY

WADSWORTH

LONGFELLOW

INTRODUCTION

The reduction or cessation of physical training or of normal ambulatory exertions that result from prolonged bed rest or from the immobilization of healthy or injured limbs produce significant effects on the body's muscular performance. The disuse of muscles, whatever the cause of the immobilization, stimulates both local and whole-body
adaptations; it is these local muscular effects that Will be discussed here.

Muscular Endurance

Muscular endurance decreases with a reduction in the use of a muscle whether the

result of immobilization or of a decrease in daily physical activity. Endurance is reduced

by 27% after 31 days of postoperative immobilization (Halkjaer-Kristensen

and

Ingemann-Hansen,

1985b). In ambulatory persons following cessation of both endurance

and strength training there is no loss of muscular endurance after 1 week; however, there

is a significant loss after 3 weeks (Shaver, 1973; Sysler and Stull, 1970). Additional decrements may (Shaver, 1973) or may not (Sysler and Stull, 1970) continue to the fifth week. After 8 weeks of deconditioning, the loss of endurance levels off and does not

progress further by week 12; exercise conditioning prior to limb immobilization or reduced activity provides some protection in that endurance does not deteriorate to pre-

training levels after 12 weeks of deconditioning (Waldman and Stull, 1969).

*Lockheed Martin Space Operations Corporation, Field, California

NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett

F -_ - F !

ImmobilizationandDisuseMuscularAtrophy

Peak Torque

Torque is "the degree to which a force tends to rotate an object about a specified

fulcrum" (Harman, 1994). Peak torque, the peak force times the length of the moment

arm that can be generated to rotate a limb about a joint, can be concentric (muscle

shortening with the contraction), eccentric (muscle lengthening with the contraction), or

isometri c (no change in muscle length with contraction) muscular contractions. Thirty-

one days of post-injury immobilization (without surgical intervention) did not reduce

concentric peak torque; however, with surgery it declined by 47% to 52% (Halkjaer-

Kristensen and Ingemarm-Hansen,

1985b). Isometric peak torque can be reduced by 80%

after 6 weeks of immobilization (Morrissey et al., 1985) and by a mean level of 45% after

2 weeks to 7 months (Stillwell, McLarren and Gersten, 1967).

Immobilization of limbs in healthy subjects decreases peak torque. Greater decrements appear after a few days, with a gradual decay and a leveling off between 2 and 4 weeks. Concentric peak torque fell 9% to 22% (depending on the speed of movement, with greater decrements at faster speeds) after 9 days (Miles et aL, 1994); it decreased 17% after 10 days (Gamrin et al., 1998), 20% after 4 weeks (Berg et al., 1991), and by only 21% after 6 weeks (Dudley et al., 1992). Eccentric peak torque appears to follow the same trend of decreasing by 12% to 19% (greater decrements at faster speeds) after 9 days (Miles et al., 1994), and by 23% after 4 weeks (Berg et aL, 1991). Both initial peak torque (average of the first five contractions) and average peak torque (average of 30 contractions) fell by 17% over 4 weeks (Berg et aL, 1993). Isometric peak torque declined 12% to 28% (greater decrements at faster speeds) after 2 weeks of limb immobilization (Stillwell et al., 1967). Isometric peak torque (using a concentric contraction) decreased by 18%, and torque with an eccentric contraction fell by 15% (Berg et al., 1991). The combination of injury and immobilization causes greater loss of peak torque than only immobilization of a healthy limb.

Cessation of physical training (deconditioning) reduces peak torque, but it is

neither as rapid nor as severe as that found after limb immobilization.

There was no

change in concentric peak torque after 4 weeks of deconditioning, but it decreased by

16% to 21% (greater decrements at faster speeds) after 12 weeks (Houston et aI., 1983).

On the other hand, isometric peak torque decreased only 7% to 8% after 8 weeks of

posttraining deconditioning (Hakkinen and Komi, 1983).

Maximal Strength

Strength is the maximal force generated by muscular contraction without regard for time (one repetition maximum or a maximal voluntary contraction). It is different from peak torque in that the rotation about an axis is not considered; it is just the exertion of force. Strength declines with immobilization and cessation of training.

Strength is reduced after 22 days of post-injury immobilization 1976); by 31 days it had declined by 43% to 58% (Fuglsang-Frederiksen

(Jenkins et al., and Scheel,

S.R. Simonson

-2-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

1978; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985b). There does not appear to be a

further deterioration in strength with immobilization to 135 days (Duchateau and Hainut,

1989; Duchateau and Hainut, 1987; Fuglsang-Frederiksen

and Scheel, 1978; Stillwell et

al., 1967; White and Davies, 1984).

Immobilization of a healthy limb causes loss of strength, although not as great a loss as occurs in an injured limb. Immobilization appears to cause greater and faster strength losses in the upper extremities than in the lower extremities (Fig. 1) (Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987; Dudley et al., 1992; Hislop, 1964; Miles et al., 1994; Ploutz-Snyder et al., 1995; Sale et al., 1982; Stillwell et al., 1967; Vaughan, 1989; White, Davies, and Brooksby, 1984).

With the cessation of arm training there is little alteration in strength during the first week (Shaver, 1973; Shaver, 1975); however, a significant reduction occurs by 3 weeks and continues to 6 weeks (41%) when strength loss is attenuated, and there is no additional loss to 8 weeks (MacDougall et al., 1980; Shaver, 1973; Shaver, 1975). Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch (1981) found a smaller reduction (12%) in leg strength; thus, the upper extremities may experience greater decrements. Narici et al. (1989) calculated that strength decreased by 0.3% per day of deconditioning.

Eiectromyography

Electromyographic

(EMG) activity decreases during muscular contractions

following both immobilization and deconditioning in both injured and healthy limbs.

This decreased activity occurs within 3 days of post-injury immobilization (Wolf,

Magora, and Gonen, 1971) and can reach 45% by 8 weeks (Duchateau and Hainut, 1989).

After 4 weeks to 6 weeks of post-injury immobilization, increasing the resistant force did

not increase the firing frequency of the immobilized muscle as much as in the

contralateral control (Fuglsang-Frederiksen

and Scheel, 1978). Electromyographic

activity in a healthy limb decreases by 36% after 2 weeks of immobilization (Vaughan,

1989), whereas activity at the same relative load (35% of maximum voluntary

contraction) was unchanged (Fuglevand, Bilodeau, and Enoka, 1995). However, the

EMG activity during pre-determined absolute loads increased by 300% to 600% after

6 weeks of immobilization (Dudley et al., 1992).

It is clear that reductions in EMG activity during limb immobilization with and without injury are uniformly 6% to 12% greater than that following the cessation of training (Hakkinen and Komi, 1983). The rate of loss of EMG activity (with training cessation) is about 0.7% per day of disuse (Narici et al., 1989).

Electrical stimulation
Electrical stimulation can be used to determine whether the deconditioning was associated more with neural or local muscular factors. If the response to electrical

S.R. Simonson

-3-

"

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

stimulation does not change after deconditioning, then neural factors are probably the cause of performance decrements. On the other hand, if muscular alterations predominate, then there will be changes in the response to electrical stimulation.
Muscular contraction time of an injured limb increases by 13% to 16% after 6 to 8 weeks of immobilization (Duchateau and Hainut, 1989). The time required for a muscle to reach peak tension (TPT) increases 16% after 8 weeks (Duchateau and Hainut, 1987) and decreases by 25% after 135 days of immobilization (White and Davies, 1984). The half relaxation time (˝ RT), the time it takes for the muscle to release half of a generated contraction, increased by 14% after 6 to 8 weeks of immobilization (Duchateau and Hainut, 1987, 1989) and does not decrease further by 135 days (White and Davies, 1984). The magnitude of the decreases in maximal twitch tetanic tension is similar to those for maximal voluntary contraction force, for example, 33% after 6 to 8 weeks (Duchateau and Hainut, 1987, 1989) and up to 51% by 135 days (White and Davies, 1984). The fatigue index (rate of decay of mechanical tension) is unchanged by immobilization (Duchateau and Hainut, 1987, 1989).
Immobilization of a healthy limb elicited the same alteration in TPT as did an injured limb. It increased 13% in the first week and remained unchanged after 14 days (White et aL, 1984) and 21 days (Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987). The ˝ RT (leg) increased by 22% in the first week and did not change in the second (White et al., 1984) and was at 18% (forearm)after 21 days (Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987). Maximal twitch tetanic tension was unchanged after the first week (white et al., 1984), had decreased 10% after the third week (Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987), and the fatigue index was unchanged (Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987; Fuglevand, Bilodeau, and Enoka, 1995; Miles et al., 1994; White et al., 1984).
The cessation of training alone did not affect the ˝ RT after 12 weeks of deconditioning (Hakkinen, Alen, and Komi, 1985), but the maximal twitch tetanic tension decreased by 25% after 5 weeks of deconditioning (Sale et al., 1982).
Thus, it appears that local muscle adaptation and not neural factors is primarily responsible for the loss of function resulting from immobilization or cessation of training.

Blood and Muscle Biochemistry

The blood acid (lactate) base (bicarbonate) relationship changes with conditioning

and deconditioning (Costill et al., 1985). Resting lactate is elevated with leg

immobilization (Richter et al., 1989), but unaffected by arm immobilization (Ward et al.,

1986); exercise blood lactate was decreased by 23% after 2 weeks of deconditioning from

running (Houston et al., 1979). In contrast, after 4 weeks of detraining, blood lactate

increased by 131% above the trained level in competitive swimmers (Costill et al., 1985;

Neuffer et al., 1987) during a swimming challenge, but by only 5% for single arm

exercise (Ward et al., 1986). This large difference in the exercise-induced

increase in

lactate is probably a result of the amount of muscle mass involved. Increases in blood

S.R. Simonson

-4-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

lactate may indicate decreases in lactate clearance, aerobic ATP generation, efficiency, or alterations in local blood flow (Costil et al., 1985; Neuffer et al., 1987; Ward et al., 1986). Decreases in blood lactate might indicate a reduced aerobic capacity, anaerobic energy production, or alterations in local blood flow (Houston, Bentzen, and Larsell, 1979). There were no changes in blood lactate with cessation of activity by the elderly or by those participating in a low-intensity exercise program (Orlander et al., 1977; Picketing et al., 1997).

Data from sampling of the intracellular biochemical environment by means of

muscle biopsy also reflect the decrease in muscle function during deconditioning.

Two

of the three electrolytes involved in establishing the membrane potential are altered (CI

increases by 111%, Na + increases by 37%, and K ÷ is unchanged), whereas those that do

not affect the membrane potential (PO43- and S 2") do not change (Wroblewski et al.,

1987).

The energy-rich phosphates do not respond appreciably to training or detraining. ATP does not change (Gamrin et aL, 1998; MacDougall et al., 1977; Ward et al., 1986) and phosphocreatine and total creatine do not change after 10 days of leg immobilization (Gamrin et al., 1998); but both decrease by 23% after 5 weeks of arm immobilization (MacDougall et al., 1977; Ward et al., 1986). However, muscle glycogen is reduced by 26% to 45% after 4 to 5 weeks of training cessation (Costill et al. 1985; MacDougall et al., 1977; Ward et al., 1986).

There is some disagreement about the alterations in net intracellular protein content during immobilization and detraining, because there is no change in the total amino acid concentration (Gamrin et al., 1998), but there is a reduction in total protein concentration (Gibson et al., 1987). Is the latter a reduction in protein anabolism or an increase in protein catabolism, or some combination? Injury and duration of immobilization cloud this picture; for example, 10 days of immobilization of a healthy leg did not change protein synthesis (Gamrin et al., 1998), but 37 days of immobilization of an injured leg reduced anabolism by 26% (Gibson et al., 1987). Protein catabolism may also be increased (Gibson et aL, 1987) resulting in a protein concentration reduced by a decrease in anabolism and an increase in catabolism (Gibson et al., 1987; Rennie et al., 1983).

Protein production during immobilization of the healthy limb causes no change in the ribosome concentration; however, the RNA content decreased by 16% during 10 days of limb immobilization (Gamrin et al., 1998). In the injured limb, 38 days of immobilization reduced RNA activity by 48% compared with the contralateral control (Gibson et al., 1987); the DNA content was unchanged (Gamrin et al., 1998).
Because alterations in intracellular and plasma amino acid concentrations respond differently, plasma concentrations are not indicative of what is occurring within the muscle; thus a muscle biopsy must be done to understand the local effects of immobilization (unloading) or disuse (Vinnars, Bergstom, and Furst, 1975). From the few available data it seems that although muscle RNA concentration is decreased during

SR. Simonson

-5-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

leg unloading, protein synthesis and the total amino acid concentration are unaltered (Gamrin et al., 1998). Muscle asparagine, carnosine, glutamine, histidine, isoleucine, methionine, ornithine, and threonine are unchanged (Gamrin et al., 1998; Vinnars, Bergstom, and Furst, 1975). Intracellular markers of protein breakdown increase; branched chain amino acids (+ 49%) and asparagine, citrulline, phenylalanine, and threonine (Gamrin et al., 1998; Vinnars, Bergstom, and Furst, 1975). Muscle alanine, glycine, leucine, lysine, serine, taurine, tyrosine, and valine also increase, and muscle arginine, glutamate, glutamine, and proline, decrease (Vinnars, Bergstom, and Furst, 1975).

The enzymes involved in energy transport are also affected differently by the disuse associated with immobilization or detraining. ATPase is unchanged by 5 to 6

weeks of detraining (MacDougall et aL 1980). Creatine kinase (CK) is decreased by 12%

6 weeks post-surgery; the CK MB isoform falls by 18% and the mitochondrial isoform by

4% (Jansson et al., 1987). The detraining data are ambiguous showing no change in aerobic athletes (Chi et al., 1983; Houston et al., 1983) and an increase or a decrease after

resistance training (Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981; MacDougall et al., 1977).

Hexokinase, the first enzyme in glycolysis appears to be slow to respond to the cessation

of aerobic training; there was no change measured after 15 days of detraining (Houston et

aL, 1983), but a 17% decrease after 6 to 12 weeks of detraining (Chi et al., 1983). HAD

(3-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase), involved in fatty acid oxidation, exhibits the same

slow responses, for there is no change after 15 days (Houston et al., 1983) but a decrease

of 14% by 8 weeks (Orlander et al._ 1977). However, Richter et al. (1989) found a

similar relative decrease in HAD after only 7 days of immobilization.

Myokinase is

unchanged (Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981).

Not only energy utilization but energy substrate uptake may also be changed by disuse. Glucose uptake is reduced by 13% after 7 days of healthy leg immobilization (Richter et al., 1989); a reduction of 17% by 6 days to 33% by 10 days in the GLUT-4 transport molecule may be responsible for this (McCoy, Proietto, and Hargreaves, 1994; Vukovich et al., 1996). However, no change in GLUT-4 transport was noted in either endurance- or strength-trained individuals after 14 days of training cessation (Houmard et al., 1993). Lipoprotein lipase (free fatty acid uptake molecule) activity is also reduced after 14 days of detraining (Simsolo, Ong, and Kern, 1993).

Oxidative enzymes, thus the oxidative capacity of the muscle cell, are also

reduced by disuse. This reduction is especially pronounced in the slow-twitch oxidative

(SO) fibers (Haggmark, Jansson, and Eriksson, 1981). Aspartate aminotransferase decreases by 30% after 6 weeks post-anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) surgery

immobilization (Jansson et aL, 1987). Activity of 13-hydroxyacyl-CoA

dehydrogenase

falls by 34% and activity ofmalate dehydrogenase declines by 29% with 6 to 12 weeks of

detraining (Chi et al., 1983). NADH tetrazolium reductase is unchanged (Halkjaer-

Kristensen and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985d) as is pyruvate dehydrogenase activity and

concentration (Ward et aL, 1986); however, pyruvate dehydrogenase responsiveness to exercise is reduced with immobilization (Ward et al., 1986). Succinate dehydrogenase

activity is not affected by 14 days of detraining (Houston et aL, 1983), but is reduced by

S.R. Simonson

-6-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

19% to 35% with 5 to 6 weeks of post-injury immobilization or with 12 weeks of

detraining (Chi et aL, 1983; Coyle et al., 1984; Haggmark, Jansson, and Eriksson, 1981;

Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985d). Six to 8 weeks of detraining will

return it to pre-conditioning levels (Henriksson and Reitman, 1977; Klausen, Anderson,

and Pelle, 1980). Reductions in succinate dehydrogenase may be preferential to SO

fibers with a 53% reduction compared with a 33% decrease in fast-twitch-glycolytic

(FG)

and fast-twitch oxidative/glycolytic

(FOG) fibers (Castro et aL, 1999; Haggmark,

Jansson, and Eriksson, 1981).

Citrate synthase decreases in injury-induced immobilization and in aerobically trained individuals who detrain: by 9% after 10 days to 400% after 84 days (Berg et al., 1993; Chi et al., 1983; Coyle et al., 1984; Houmard et al., 1992; Houmard et al., 1993; McCoy, Proietto, and Hargeaves, 1994; Moore et al., 1987) and the reductions are directly proportional to the duration of conditioning and inactivity (Moore et aL, 1987). There does not appear to be any citrate synthase decrement in those who have strengthtrained and then cease to do so (Houmard et al., 1993).

Cytochrome C decreases within 2 weeks of detraining and continues to fall by weeks 4 to 6. By 6 weeks it has returned to pre-training levels and does not fall further (Henriksson and Reitman, 1977; Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980). The lower levels of cytochrome C reduce the ability to oxidize free fatty acids and may be related to the decrease in lipoprotein lipase.

The glycolytic/glycogenolytic

enzymes also have varied responses to

immobilization and detraining. Adenylate kinase, fructose biphosphatase (Chi et al.,

1983), phosphofructokinase

(Berg et al., 1993; Chi et al., 1983; Costill et al., 1985;

Haggmark, Jansson, and Ericksson, 1981; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985d; Houston etal., 1983; Jansson etal., 1987; Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980;

Orlander et al., 1977), and phosphorylase (Chi et aI., 1983; Costill et al., 1985) are all unaltered. However, Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle (1980) reported a reduction in

phosphorylase during detraining. This difference in phosphorylase responses may have

been peculiar to the populations studied, that is, inactive individuals who were trained and then detrained (Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980) versus athletes detraining (Chi

et al., 1983; Costill et al., 1985). Increases in ot-glycerophosphate

dehydrogenase

occurred in both Type I and Type II muscle fibers, with Type I being the most affected in

injured and immobilized individuals (Castro et al., 1999; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and

Ingemann-Hansen,

1985d), but it is unaltered in subjects who have ceased participation in

a very low-intensity aerobic conditioning program (Orlander et al., 1977). Lactate

dehydrogenase is unaltered when strength training stops (Houston et al., 1983), but

decreases with cessation of aerobic training or with injury-induced immobilization (Houston, Bentzen, and Larsen, 1979; Jansson et al., 1987) and will return to pre-training

levels by 4 weeks of inactivity (Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980). However, Chi

(1983) found increases in lactate dehydrogenase when endurance-trained

runners ceased

training for 6 to 12 weeks. Myoglobin, the muscular oxygen transport molecule,

increased during injury-induced immobilization (Jansson et al., 1987), but was unaffected

by 2 to 12 weeks of training cessation (Coyle et al., 1984).

SR. Simonson

-7-

"

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Muscle fat and water contents are unchanged limb (Gamrin et al., 1998).

during immobilization

of a healthy

The effect of deconditioning on the number of capillaries per muscle fiber has been determined from muscle biopsies, and there is some discrepancy when immobilization data are compared with detraining data. The number of capillaries per fiber (all fiber types) is unchanged during immobilization of the healthy limb in untrained individuals (Berg et al., 1993; Hather et al., 1992). However, cessation of training causes a decrease of 11%, with the greatest loss occurring by week 4; Type I fibers decrease by 16%, Type IIa fibers by 10%, and Type IIb fibers by 14% (Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980).

Atrophy

Muscle atrophy occurs in unused limbs, circumference being reduced by 10% to 13% as a result of injury and immobilization (Haggmark, Jansson, and Ericksson, 1981;

Lindboe and Platou, 1982; Morrissey et al., 1985; Wolf, Magora, and Gonen, 1971),

immobilization of a healthy limb, or discontinuation of training (Hakkinen, Alen, and

Komi, 1985; Hakkinen, Komi, and Tesch, 1981; Ingemarm-Hansen

and Halkjaer-

Kristensen, 1977; MacDougall et al., 1977). Limb cross-sectional area is decreased by

2% to 5% (Miles et al., 1994; White et al., 1984) after 1 week of immobilization and by

an additional 3% by week 2 (White et al., 1984). Limb volume decreases by 5% to 12%

because of injury and immobilization (Davies and Sargeant, 1975; Gibson et al., 1987;

Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985a; Ingemann-Hansen

and Halkjaer-

Kristensen, 1977; Sargeant et al., 1977) and also by 5% to 10% with immobilization alone (Hislop, 1964; Richter et al., 1989). There appears to be little difference between

the effects of injury, immobilization, or disuse.

Most of the atrophy can be contributed to decreases in muscle cross-sectional area

because the limb fat compartment does not appear to be affected by deconditioning (Berg

et al., 1991; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985a; Ingemann-Hansen

and

Halkjaer-Kristensen,

1977). In the healthy leg, immobilized cross-sectional area of the

ankle extensor muscles decreased by 14% to 18% after 6 weeks (Dudley et al., 1992;

Hather et al., 1992), with the gastrocnemius losing 26% and the soleus 17% (Hather et

al., 1992). The total mid-thigh muscle cross-sectional area decreased by 7% to 12% in 4

to 6 weeks (Berg et al., 1991; Hather et al., 1992) at a rate of about 0.1% per day (Narici et al., 1989). The primary locomotive muscles of the thigh (quadriceps) are affected

more than the hamstrings. A decrease of 8% to 27 % over a period of 16 days to 6 weeks

(Adams, Hather, and Dudley, 1994; Dudley et al., 1992; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and

Ingemann-Hansen,

1985c; Hather et al., 1992; Ingemann-Hansen

and Halkjaer-

Kristensen, 1980; Ploutz-Snyder et al., 1995; Young et al., 1982). The hamstring area is

either unaffected (Adams, Hather, and Dudley, 1994; Young et al., 1982) or decreased by

4% to 7% (Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985a; Hather et al., 1992) post-

immobilization with or without injury. The forearm loses 4% of muscle cross-sectional

area after 9 days of immobilization (Miles et al., 1994).

S.R. Simonson

-8-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Muscle fiber size decreases by 38% in patients with knee injuries without joint

immobilization (Young et al., 1982). Type I (SO) fiber size (decreased by 39%) tended

to be less affected than Type II (decreased by 46%) when compared with the contralateral

limb (Young et al., 1982). When an injury is accompanied by immobilization there does

not appear to be a difference in fiber type atrophy after 5 days (Lindboe and Platou,

1982), but over 5 weeks of immobilization the postural endurance muscle (SO) fibers

tend to atrophy more than the FG or FOG fibers (Gibson et al., 1987; Haggmark,

Jansson, and Ericksson, 1981). The immobilization-induced

atrophy within the healthy

limb is not as great, nor does it occur as rapidly, for there was no change in fiber size

after 4 weeks of immobilization (Adams, Hather, and Dudley, 1994; Berg et al., 1993),

but by 6 weeks of unloading there was a total decrease of 14% with Type I size

decreasing 12% and Type II by 15% (Type IIa decreased, lib unchanged) (Hather et al.,

1992). Others have found no alteration in Type II fiber cross-sectional area with training

cessation (Larsson and Ansved, 1985).

When athletes decondition the cross-sectional area decreases for all fiber types, but there is little consensus as to the degree and preferential atrophy. Some have found no alteration after 2 weeks and up to 42 months of detraining by athletes (Chi et al., 1983; Houmard et al., 1992; Larsson and Ansved, 1985); others have reported that fasttwitch fibers atrophy more than slow-twitch fibers, with Type lib fibers exhibiting the greatest loss when untrained individuals are trained and then detrained (Hakkinen, Alen, and Komi, 1985; Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980). Thus, the degree and fiber-type atrophy are different with duration of previous training; short-term training adaptations are lost rapidly, and those after long-term training are retained longer.

Fiber Number and Relative Percentage

Fiber numbers and relative percentage of fiber populations have also been

determined from muscle biopsies. The 21% decrease of total muscle fiber content

31 days post-surgery is a result of a total fiber number loss of 28% (Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemann-Hansen,

1985c). The Type I (SO) muscle fibers are more susceptible to

this atrophy with decrements of 8% to 21% over 31 days to 35 days (Haggmark, Jansson,

and Ericksson, 1981; Halkjaer-Kristensen

and Ingemarm-Hansen,

1985c). This

predominantly type I atrophy trend does not exist after spinal cord injury that results in

limb paralysis, for the percent of Type I increased by 5%, while Type IIa decreased by

56%, and Type Ilax + IIx increased by 36% (Castro et al., 1999). A reduction in the

percentage of one fiber type must be reflected in an increased percentage of the other

(Haggrnark, Ericksson, and Jansson, 1986).

Immobilization without injury presents a different response, for there is no change in fiber type composition (no preferential atrophy) after 49 days (Adams, Hather, and Dudley, 1994; Berg et al., 1993; Hather et al., 1992).

Again, the detraining picture is not as clear. No preferential atrophy is found after a layoff of 12 weeks from strength training or 8 weeks from low-intensity aerobic

SR Simonson

-9-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy
conditioning (Houston et al., 1983; Orlander et al., 1977). However, there is a 14% to 25% decrease in the relative percentage of Type I fibers 8 weeks to 42 months after ceasing aerobic athletic training (Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980; Larsson and Ansved, 1985) which leads to an increase in the relative percentage of Type II fibers (Klausen, Andersen, and Pelle, 1980).
Connective Tissue
The effects of muscle immobilization or disuse on the tissues to which the muscles connect must also be considered. A complete review of this is beyond the scope of this chapter, but a few words about the little work done in this area would help to complete the muscle-function picture. The connective tissues are affected, but less significantly than the muscle itself because they have a slower metabolism (Kannus et al., 1992). The muscle-tendon junction atrophies and weakens, the contact area decreases by 16.5% in 1 week. Proprioceptive mechanisms within the muscle and muscle-tendon junction degenerate and are not as responsive. The tendon itself loses tensile strength and elastic stiffness because the collagen fibers atrophy and disorganize and there is a decrease in cross-link number and size. Ligaments also decrease in total collagen mass (Kannus et al., 1992) and periarticular soft tissue rigidity increases and the joint capsule shrinks (Appell, 1990).
Summary
It is apparent that there are three levels of disuse atrophy and associated reductions in performance. In order of greatest atrophy and decrement of performance they are (1) injury with immobilization, (2) immobilization of the healthy limb, and (3) cessation of training. The metabolic activity of the tissue, the degree of disuse, and the previous state of training all affect the degree of atrophy.

S.R. Sirnonson

-10-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

REFERENCES

Adams, G. R., Hather, B. M., and Dudley, G. A. Effect of short-term human skeletal muscle strength and size. Aviat. Space Environ. 1121, 1994.

unweighting on Med. 65:1116-

Appell, H.-J. Muscular atrophy following immobilization: 58, 1990.

a review. Sports Med. 10: 42-

Berg, H. E., Dudley, limb unloading 70: 1882-1885,

G. A., Haggrnark, T., Ohlsen, H., and Tesch, P. A. Effects of lower on skeletal muscle mass and function in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 1991.

Berg, H. E., Dudley, G. A., Hather, B., and Tesch, P. A. Work and morphologic characteristics of the human quadriceps unloading. Clin. Physiol. 13: 337-347, 1993.

capacity and metabolic muscle in response to

Castro, M. J., Apple, D. F., Staron, R.S., Campos, G. E. R., and Dudley, G. A. Influence of complete spinal cord injury on skeletal muscle within 6 mo of injury. J Appl. Physiol. 86: 350-358, 1999.

Chi, M. M.-Y., Hintz, C. S., Coyle, E. F., Martin, W. H., III, Ivy, J. L., Nemeth, P. M., Holloszy, J. O., and Lowry, O. H. Effects of detraining on enzymes of energy metabolism in individual human muscle fibers. Am. J. Physiol. Cell. Physiol. 244: C276-C287, 1983.

Costill, D. L., Fink, W. J., Hargreaves, M., King, D. S., Thomas, R., and Fielding, R. Metabolic characteristics of skeletal muscle during detraining from competitive swimming. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 17: 339-343, 1985.
Coyle, E. F., Martin, W. H., III, Sinacore, D. R., Joyner, M. J., Hagberg, J. M., and Holloszy, J. O. Time course of loss of adaptations after stopping prolonged intense endurance training. _ Appl. Physiol. 57: 1857-1864, 1984.

Davies, C. T. M., Rutherford, I. C., and Thomas, D. O. Electrically of the triceps surae during and following 21 days of voluntary Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 56: 306-312, 1987.

evoked contractions leg immobilization.

Davies, C. T. M., and Sargeant, A. J. Effects of exercise therapy on total and component tissue leg volumes of patients undergoing rehabilitation from lower limb injury. Ann. Hum. Biol. 2: 327-337, 1975.

Duchateau, J., and Hainut, K. Electrical and mechanical changes in immobilized muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 62" 2168-2173, 1987.

human

Duchateau, J., and Hainut, K. Effects of immobilization on contractile properties, recruitment and firing rates of human motor units. J Physiol. (Lond.) 422: 55-65, 1989.

Dudley, G. A., Duvoisin, M. R., Adams, (3. R., Meyer, R. A., Belew, A. H., and Buchanan, P. Adaptations to unilateral lower limb suspension in humans. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 63: 678-683, 1992.

S.R. Simonson

-11-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Fuglevand, A. J, Bilodeau, M., and Enoka, R. M. minimal effect on the strength and fatigability Physiol. 78: 847-855, 1995.

Short-term immobilization of a human hand muscle.

has a J. Appl.

Fuglsang-Frederiksen,

A., and Scheel, U. Transient decrease in number of motor units

after immobilization in man. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 41:924-929, 1978.

Gamrin, L., Berg, H. E., Essen, P., Tesch, P. A., Hultman, E., Garlick, P. J., McNurlan, M. A., and Wernerman, J. The effect of unloading on protein synthesis in human skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol. Scand. 163: 369-377, 1998.

Gibson, J. N. A., Halliday, D., Morrison, W. L., Stoward, P. J., Hornsby, G. A., Wyatt, P.

W., Murdoch, G., and Rennie, M. J. Decrease in human quadriceps muscle protein

turnover consequent upon leg immobilization.

Clin. Sci. 72: 503-509, 1987.

Haggrnark, T., Eriksson, E., and Jansson, E. Muscle fiber type changes in human

skeletal muscle after injuries and immobilization.

Orthopedics 9:181-185, 1986.

Haggmark, T., Jansson, E., and Eriksson, E. Fiber type area and metabolic potential of

the thigh muscle in man after knee surgery and immobilization.

Int. J. Sports Med.

2: 12-17, 1981.

Hakkinen, K., Alen, M., and Komi, P. V. Changes in isometric force- and relaxation-

time, electromyographic

and muscle fibre characteristics of human skeletal muscle

during strength training and detraining. Acta Physiol. Scand. 125: 573-585, 1985.

Hakkinen, K., and Komi, P. V. Electromyographic

changes during strength training and

detraining. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 15: 455-460, 1983.

Hakkinen, K., Komi, P. V., and Tesch, P.A. Effect of combined concentric and eccentric strength training and detraining on force-time, muscle fiber and metabolic characteristics of leg extensor muscles. Scand. J. Sports Sci. 3: 50-58, 1981.

Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J., and Ingemann-Hansen,

T. Wasting of the human quadriceps

muscle after knee ligament injuries: I, anthropometrical

consequences.

Scand. J.

Rehab. Med. 13: 5-I 1, 1985a.

Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J., and Ingemann-Hansen,

T. Wasting of the human

muscle after knee ligament injuries: IV, dynamic and static muscle

Scand. J. Rehab. Med. 13: 29-37, 1985b.

quadriceps function.

Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J., and Ingemann-Hansen,

T. Wasting of the human quadriceps

muscle after knee ligament injuries: II, muscle fiber morphology. Scand. J. Rehab.

Med. 13: 12-20, 1985c.

Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J., and Ingemann-Hahsen,

T. Wasting of the human quadriceps

muscle after knee ligament injuries: III, oxidative and glycolytic enzyme activities.

Scand. J. Rehab. Med. 13: 21-28, 1985d.

Harman, E. The biomechanics and Conditioning, edited pp. 19-50.

of resistance exercise. In Essentials by T. R. Baechle, Human Kinetics:

of Strength Champaign,

Training IL, 1994,

S.R. Simonson

-12-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Hather, B. M., Adams, G. R., Tesch, P. A., and Susley, G. A. Skeletal muscle responses to lower limb suspension in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 72: 1493-1498, 1992.

Henriksson, J., and Reitman, J. S. Time course of changes in human skeletal muscle succinate dehydrogenase and cytochrome oxidase activities and maximal oxygen uptake with physical activity and inactivity. Acta Physiol. Scand. 99: 91-97, 1977.

Hislop, H. J. Response of immobilized Assoc. 44: 339-347, 1964.

muscle to isometric exercise. J Am. Phys. Ther.

Houmard, J. A., Hortobagyi, T., Johns, R. A., Bruno, N. L., Nute, C.C., Shinebarger, M. H., and Welborn, J. W. Effect of short-term training cessation on performance measures in distance runners. Int. 3. Sports Med. 13: 572-576, 1992.

Houmard, J. A., Hortobagyi, T., Neufer, P. D., Johns, R. A., Fraser, D. D., Israel, R. G., and Dohm, G. L. Training cessation does not alter GLUT-4 protein levels in human skeletal muscle. 3. Appl. Physiol. 74: 776-781, 1993.

Houston, M. E., Bentzen, H., and Larsen, H. Interrelationships

between skeletal muscle

adaptations and performance as studied by detraining and retraining. Acta Physiol.

Scand. 105: 163-170, 1979.

Houston, M. E., Froese, E. A., Valeriote, S. P., Green, H. J., and Ranney, D. A. Muscle performance, morphology and metabolic capacity during strength training and detraining: a one leg model. Eur. ,I. Appl. Physiol. 51: 25-35, 1983.

Ingemann-Hansen,

T., and Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J. Lean and fat component

thigh: the effects of immobilization in plaster and subsequent physical

Scand. 3. Rehab. Med. 9: 67-72, 1977.

of the human training.

Ingemann-Hansen, determination

T., and Halkjaer-Kristensen,

J. Computerized tomographic

ofhuman thigh components. Scand. 3. Rehab. Med. 12:27-31,

1980.

Jansson, E., Sylven, C., Arvidsson, I., and Eriksson, E. Increase in myoglobin and decrease in oxidative enzyme activities by leg muscle immobilization Acta Physiol. Scand. 132: 515-517, 1987.

content in man.

Jenkins, D. G., Imms, F. J., Prestidge, S. P., and Small, G. I. Muscle strength before and after menisectomy: a comparison of methods of post-operative management. Rheumatol. Rehab. 15: 153-155, 1976.

Kannus, P., Jozsa, L., Renstrom, P., Jarvinen, M., Kvist, M., Lehto, M., Oja, P., and Vuori, I. The effects of training, immobilization and remobilization on musculoskeletal tissue. Scand. 3. Med. Sci. Sports. 2:100-118, 1992.

Klausen, K., Andersen, L. B., and Pelle, muscle capillarization and enzyme Physiol. Scand. 113: 9-16, 1980.

I. Adaptive changes in work capacity, levels during training and detraining.

skeletal Acta

Larsson, L., and Ansved, T. Effects of long-term physical training and detraining on enzyme histochemical and functional skeletal muscle characteristics in man. Muscle Nerve 8:714-722, 1985.

S.R. Simonson

-13-

yr
Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Lindboe, C. F., and Platou, C. S. Disuse atrophy of human skeletal muscle: an enzyme histochemical study. Acta Neuropath. 56: 241-244, 1982.

MacDougall, J. D., Elder, G. C. B., Sale, D. G., Moroz, J. R., and Sutton, J. R. Effects of strength training and immobilization on human muscle fibres. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 43: 23-34, 1980.

MacDougall, J. D., Ward, G. R., Sale, D. G., and Sutton, human skeletal muscle to heavy resistance training Physiol. 43: 700-703, 1977.

J. R. Biochemical and immobilization.

adaptation of J Appl.

McCoy, M., Proietto, J., and Hargreaves, M. Effect of detraining on GLUT-4 protein in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 77: 1532-1536, 1994.

Miles, M. P., Clarkson, P. M., Bean, M., Ambach, K., Mulroy, J., and Vincent, K. Muscle function at the wrist following 9 d of immobilization and suspension. Sci. Sports Exerc. 26: 615-623, 1994.

Med.

Moore, R. L., Thacker, E. M., Kelley, G. A., Musch, T. I., Sinoway, L. I., Foster,

and Dickinson, A. L. Effect of training/detraining

on submaximal exercise

responses in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 63: 1719-1724, 1987.

V. L.,

Mortissey, M. C., Brewster, C. E., Shields, stimulation on the quadriceps during Sports Med. 13: 40-46, 1985.

C. L., and Brown, postoperative knee

M. The effects immobilization.

of electrical Am. J.

Narici, M. V., Roi, G. S., Minetti, A. E., and Cerretelli, P. Changes in force, crosssectional area and neural activation during strength training and detraining of the human quadriceps. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 59: 310-319, 1989.

Neuffer, P. D., Costill, D. L., Fielding, R. A., Flyn, M. G., and Kirwan, J. P. Effect of reduced training on muscular strength and endurance in competitive swimmers. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 19: 486-490, 1987.

Orlander, J., Kiessling, K.-H., Karlsson, J., and Ekblom, B. Low intensity training, inactivity and resumed training in sedentary men. Acta Physiol. Scand. 101:351362, 1977.

Picketing, G., Fellmann, N., Morio, B., Ritz, P., Amonchot, A., Vermorel, M., and Coudert, J. Effects of endurance training on the cardiovascular system and water compartments in the elderly. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 83: 1300-1306, 1997.

Ploutz-Snyder, L. L., Tesch, P. A., Crittenden, D. J., and Dudley, G. A. Effect of unweighting on skeletal muscle use during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 79:168-175, 1995.

Rennie, M. J., Edwards, R. H. T., Emery, P. W., Halliday, D., Lundholm, K., and Millward, D. J. Depressed protein synthesis is the dominant characteristic of muscle wasting and cachexia. Clin. Physiol. 3: 387-398, 1983.

Richter, E. A., Kiens, B., Mizuno, M., and Strange, S.. Insulin action in human thighs

after one-legged immobilization.

,I. Appl. Physiol. 67:19-23, 1989.

SR. Simonson

-14-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Sale, D. G., McComas, J., MacDougall, J. D., and Upton, A. R. M. Neuromuscular adaptation in human thenar muscles following strength training and immobilization. J. Appl. Physiol. 53: 419-424, 1982.
Sargeant, A. J., Davies, C. T. M., Edwards, R. H. T., Maunder, C., and Young, A. Functional and structural changes after disuse of human muscle. Clin. Sci. Mol. Med. 52: 337-342, 1977.

Shaver, L. G. Cross transfer effects of training and detraining on relative muscle endurance. Am. Corr. Ther. J. 27: 49-56, 1973.

Shaver, L. G. Cross training effects of conditioning and deconditioning strength. Ergonomics 18: 9-16, 1975.

on muscular

Simsolo, R. B., Ong, J. M., and Kern, P. A. The regulation of adipose tissue and muscle lipoprotein lipase in runners by detraining. J. Clin. Invest. 92: 2124-2130, 1993.

Stillwell, D. M., McLarren, G. L., and Gersten, to immobilization of the lower extremity. 1967.

J. W. Atrophy ofquadriceps muscle due Arch. Phys. Med. Rehab. 48: 289-295,

Sysler, B. L., and Stull, G. A. Muscular endurance retention as a function of length of detraining. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 41: 105-109, 1970.

Vaughan, V. G. Effects of upper limb immobilization movement time, and triphasic electromyographic 119-129, 1989.

on isometric muscle strength, characteristics. Phys. Ther. 69:

Vinnars, E., Bergstom, J., Furst, P. Influence of the postoperative state on the intracellular free amino acids in human muscle tissue. Ann. Surg. 182: 665-671, 1975.

Vukovich, M. D., Arciero, P. J., Kohrt, W. M., Racette S. B., Hansen, P. A., and Holloszy, J. O. Changes in insulin action and GLUT-4 with 6 days of inactivity in endurance runners. J. Appl. Physiol. 80: 240-244, 1996.
Waldman, R., and Stull, G. A. Effects of various periods of inactivity on retention of newly acquired levels of muscular endurance. Res. Q Exerc. Sport 40: 396-401, 1969.

Ward, G. R., MacDougall, J. D., Sutton, J. R., Toews, C. J., and Jones, N. L. Activation

of human muscle pyruvate dehydrogenase with activity and immobilization.

Clin.

Sci. 70: 207-210, 1986.

White, M. J., and Davies, C. T. M. The effects of immobilization, after lower leg fracture, on the contractile properties of human triceps surae. Clin. Sci. 66: 277282, 1984.

White, M. J., Davies, C. T. M., and Brooksby, P. The effects of short-term voluntary immobilization on the contractile properties of the human triceps surae. Q. J. Exp. Physiol. 69: 685-691, 1984.

Wolf, E., Magora, A., and Gonen, B. Disuse atrophy of the quadriceps muscle.

Electromyography

11: 479-490, 1971.

S.R. Simonson

-15-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Wroblewski, R., Arvidsson, I., Eriksson, E., and Jansson, E. Changes in elemental

composition of human muscle fibers following surgery and immobilization:

an X-

ray microanalytical study. Acta Physiol. Scand. 130: 491-494, 1987.

Young, A., Hughes, I., Round, J. M., and Edwards, R. H. T. The effect of knee injury on the number of muscle fibers in the human quadrieeps femoris. Clin. Sci. 62: 227234, 1982.

SR. Simonson

-16-

-

Immobilization and Disuse Muscular Atrophy

Figure Caption:
Figure 1. Mean percent changes in maximal muscular strength from 7 to 42 days of upper and lower extremity immobilization: Ext = extension, Flex = flexion. (From Davies, Rutherford, and Thomas, 1987; Dudley et al., 1992; Hislop, 1964; Miles et al., 1994; Ploutz-Snyder et al., 1995; Sale et al., 1982; Stillwell, McLarren, and Gersten, 1967; Vaughan, 1989; White, Davies, and Brooksby, 1984.)

S.R. Simonson

-17-

,b

v'(3

,d"
T--
_P
T"
>,, ID d E I,-
˘0 ˘M
o'J o)
o

v
in
E
q)
b( z_.
o .J

I,,,-
fA
wm im
E
6)
In

,, [

l

I

o

% 'a6ueqo

i

4. FREE RADICAL

PROCESSES

IN CONDITIONING

DECONDITIONING

AND

J6zefK_dziora °

Unlearn'd he knew no schoolman's subtle art,

No language, but language of the heart.

By nature honest, by experience wise,

Healthy by temp'rance, and by exercise.

ALEXANDER

POPE

INTRODUCTION

The normal functioning of the body depends on many levels of homeostasis, one of which involves a balance between the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and other free radicals and the antioxidant defense mechanisms (Table 1). This balance is, ofcourse, dynamic and variable as the state of the body changes. One can ask at which point during normal physical activity is the equilibrium established; the obvious expectation would be that this point should usually correspond to the limited low level of physical activity that is necessary to perform the vital functions of an individual. Physical activity of high intensity means increases in metabolism which augments production of free radicals and other reactive oxygen species and increases oxidative stress. Interestingly, an opposite situation, that is, immobilization, is also outside the optimal physiological range of physical activity of an organism and can be expected to result in a dissociation between the formation and removal of reactive oxygen species. Contrary to intuitive expectations, however, studies of both extreme situations considered, that is, intensive physical activity and significant immobilization deconditioning (namely, bed rest) instigate oxidative stress. In this paper I would like to discuss tentative explanations for these findings.
PHYSICAL EXERCISE AND CONDITIONING

Whole-body physical exercise requires a considerable increase in metabolism, including the oxidative metabolism. The intensity of whole-body respiration is augmented 10-15-fold (Keul, Koenig, and Huonker, 1996). However, oxygen flux in the active peripheral skeletal muscle tissue may increase by about 100-fold with an approximate 30-fold increase in blood flow and about a three-fold increase in arteriovenous oxygen difference (Sen, 1995). Superoxide anions are released in the
"Department of Physiology, Military Medical University, L6d_, Poland

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Table 1. Main reactive oxygen species formed in the body and main antioxidant mechanisms (free radicals in italics)

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
o
Superoxide radical anion 02 Hydrogen peroxide H202 Hydroxyl radical *OH Singlet oxygen 102 Peroxynitrite ONOO"
Hypochlorite OCl

Antioxidant defense means Antioxidants:
Glutathione Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
Tocopherol (vitamin E) Carotenoids

Enzymes disposing of ROS: Superoxide dismutase Catalase
Glutathione peroxidase/glutathione Thioredoxin/thioredoxin

reductase

reductase/thioredoxin

peroxidase

mitochondria as by-products of mitochondrial respiration. Up to 4% of the oxygen

utilized by mitochondria is not reduced to water in a four-electron pathway, but only to

superoxide via a one-electron pathway. Therefore, intensification of mitochondrial

respiration means rapid augmentation of ROS production that is not compensated

appropriately by antioxidant mechanisms. Because these antioxidant mechanisms are

adapted metabolically to a more quiescent situation, oxidative stress intensifies.

Oxidative stress has been measured in isolated pigeon heart mitochondria; the rate of

superoxide anion production increases in direct proportion to the rate of mitochondrial

oxygen consumption (Boveris and Chance, 1973). Another important source of ROS

during exercise may be the oxidation of catecholamines and infiltration of muscles by

neutrophils which release superoxide radical anions, hydrogen peroxide, nitrous oxide,

and hypochlorite. Strenous exercise causes an influx of neutrophils into muscle tissues

(Belcastro et al., 1996; Oh-ishi et al., 1998). The pathophysiological

mechanism of

ischemia-reperfusion

during strenous exercise, especially the accumulation of

hypoxanthine and the activation of xanthine oxidase, may also contribute to the tissue

damage caused by ROS (Hellsten, 1993; Packer, 1997).

Muscle tissue may be especially sensitive to oxidative damage because the antioxidant defenses of the skeletal muscles and of the heart are poor. Basal metabolism of the heart is about 100% higher than that of the liver. At rest, a kilogram of human heart or liver was estimated to consume oxygen at rates of 94 and 44 ml.min _, respectively (Diem and Lentner, 1970). In men, the activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase

K_dziora

-2-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

are, respectively, 16 and 40 times higher in the liver than in gastrocnemius (Jenkins, Friedland, and Howald, 1984).

muscle

Exercise is accompanied by increased steady-state levels of tissue-free radicals and other reactive oxygen species. The content of free radicals in muscles, estimated by

electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometry, with their content at rest (Jackson, Edwards, that exhaustive treadmill exercise enhanced

increased by 70% during exercise compared and Symons, 1985). Other data confirmed free radicals in muscle and in the liver by

two- to three-fold (Dillard et al., 1978; Davies et al., 1982). Exhaustive swimming

exercise increased ESR signals of free radicals in rat myocardium (Kumar et al., 1992).

These studies utilizing direct ESR spectroscopy were confirmed by employing the spin

trapping attitude (Somani, 1994).

There is abundant evidence of oxidative stress during physical exercise. Whole-

body exercise in both humans (Dillard et al., 1978; Balke, Snider, and Bull, 1984; Maughan et aL, 1989) and rats (Gee and Tappel, 1981; Goldfarb et al., 1994) results in

augmented lipid peroxidation. Physical exercise in humans at 75% "v'O2r_x increased the

level of expired pentane (a final product of lipid peroxidation) by 80% compared with that from resting subjects (Dillard et al., 1978): Lipid peroxidation also increased in

humans performing submaximal (50% _/O2max) exercise (Balke, Snider, and Bull, 1984).

The concentrations of expired pentane and serum malondialdehyde

(MDA), which are

end-products of lipid peroxidation, were elevated during submaximal (60% VO2m_x) exercise and increased further with increasing oxygen levels (Kanter, Nolte, and

Holloszy, 1993). Hepatic lipid peroxidation increased by 220% in mouse liver (Leeuwenburgh and Ji, 1995). Concentrations of lipid peroxidation products in blood plasma increase during exercise (Kanter, Nolte, and Holtoszy, 1993; Lovlin et aL,1987; Sen et al., 1994), although some authors found no appreciable changes (K.retzschmar et al., 1991). The highest lipid peroxidation was observed at maximal oxygen uptake

(Viguie et aL, 1990). Half-marathon exercise resulted in increased erythrocyte

susceptibility to peroxidation (Duthie et al., 1990). Exercise at 50% and 77% _'O2m_x increased blood plasma lipid peroxidation products that were determined to be thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) (Sen et al., 1994).

Other indices of oxidative stress after intensive physical exercise include

oxidation of DNA bases, decreased content of reduced glutathione (GSH), and an

increase in the oxidized (GSSG) to reduced glutathione ratio (GSSG/GSH) (Packer,

1997). A sharp increase in blood and plasma GSSG was observed after human exercise (Gohil et al., 1988), and the total glutathione content in muscle decreased (Sen, Rahkila,

and H_inninen, 1993). An acute bout of prolonged exercise decreased liver GSH content

by as much as 30% in rats (Lew, Pyke, and Quintanilha, 1985) and mice (Leeuwenburgh and Ji, 1995). Myocardial GSH content was decreased by over 20% after mice swam to

exhaustion (Leeuwenburgh et al., 1996). These findings reflect a change in the redox

state of glutathione after exercise; on the other hand they suggest that oxidized

glutathione can be actively pumped out of skeletal muscle and the heart during exercise

(Sen, 1995; Ji and Leeuwenburgh,

1995). Such an active export of oxidized glutathione is

a protective mechanism, for an accumulation of GSSG is harmful to the cell. Data on the

K_dziora

-3-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

behavior of blood GSH during exercise are contradictory. Some authors observed no change of blood GSH during intensive exercise (Garin, 1983; Ji et aL, 1993), whereas others noted a

sharp fall in blood GSH within the first 15 min of bicycling at 65% VO2ma,, (Gohil et aL,

1988; Viguie et al., 1993). Half-marathon 09uthie et al., 1990) and 12-kin running (Ohtsuka

et al., 1994) decreased erythrocyte reduced-glutathione,

and exercising at 50% and 77%

VO2max increased the blood GSSG/GSH ratio (Sen et aI., 1994). Exhaustive exercise also decreased erythrocyte glutathione reductase in horses (Brady, Shelle, and Ullrey, 1977).

No change in total plasma antioxidant capacity was observed during exercise (Sen et aL,

1994) which may be the result of significant increases in blood plasma uric acid (Sjrdin

and Westing, 1990) and ascorbate (Viguie et al., 1993), two important contributors to the

plasma antioxidant capacity.

Exercising at 50% and 77% VO2m_ induces deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage in blood leukocytes as assessed by fluorimetric analysis of DNA unwinding (Sen et al., 1994). In mammals, oxidative DNA damage appears to be correlated with metabolic rate (Ames, Shigenaga, and Hagen, 1993); the increased exercise metabolism can be expected to augment the rate of damage. The level of oxidized DNA bases increased by 30% over the resting level 10 hr after marathon running (Asian et al., 1997; Alessio, 1993).

Another target for oxidative stress is the proteins, especially the aromatic and sulfur amino acid residues. There is evidence for skeletal muscle protein oxidation in rats

during exhaustive exercise (Reznick et al., 1992). Skeletal muscle microsomes contained fewer protein thiol groups and showed extensive protein cross-linking after exercise

(Rajguru, Yeargans, and Seidler, 1994). Among the proteins which are targets for ROS are the antioxidant enzymes themselves, which are also inactivated by ROS (Blum and

Fridovich, 1985; Pigeolet et al., 1990). Maximal exercise caused a decrease in

glutathione peroxidase and catalase activities in the muscles of calcium-deficient

rats,

apparently a result of this mechanism (Oh-ishi, Kizaki, and Ookawara, 1998). These data

also point to the role of nutritional factors in determining the effects of physical exercise.

Whole blood glutathione peroxidase was lowered in untrained subjects after acute

exercise (Asian et al., 1997) and erythrocyte catalase activity decreased after a 12-km run

(Ohtsuka et al., 1994).

It has been suggested that oxidative stress contributes to oxidative skeletal muscle fatigue (Barclay and Hansel, 1991) and to muscular atrophy (Kondo and Itokawa, 1994). Xanthine oxidase may be the main source of superoxide radicals responsible for muscle fatigue; however, this mechanism seems tO involve generation of the hydroxyl radical since the effect was attenuated by iron chelation or scavenging of the hydroxyl radical (Barclay and Hansel, 1991).

Physical exercise also releases iron; that is, increasing the pool of "loosely bound iron" (Jenkins, Krause, and Schofield, 1993; Jenkins, 1993) which may participate in the Fenton reaction (between hydrogen peroxide and Fe 2÷) generating the most dangerous reactive oxygen species, the hydroxyl radical. The increased release of iron leads, in turn,

K_dziora

-4-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

to whole-body iron loss which may result in "sports anemia" (Ehn, Carlmark, and Hoglund, 1980; Haymes, 1987).

The disturbance of the pro-oxidant/antioxidant

balance by physical exercise,

especially exercise that is long-lasting and repeated regularly (training), may induce an

adaptive reaction bringing balance back to the equilibrium point by increasing antioxidants and antioxidant enzymes. Exercise training in rats increases activity of both

Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD) (Higuchi et aL, 1985) and Mn-SOD in muscles and

several other organs (Pereira et al., 1992). Rats trained to swim over a 10-week period increased the activities of glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase, as well as the

overall antioxidant capacity of muscle, heart, and liver. The level of GSH can also be

increased in rat muscle after training, whereas vitamin E level was unchanged in several

tissues (Venditti and DiMeo, 1996). Such training also increased total antioxidant

capacity in muscle, heart, and liver (Venditti and DiMeo, 1997). Long-term (18.5-month) endurance training of rats increased cardiac catalase and decreased the malondialdehyde

(MDA) content of cardiac mitochondria (Kim et aL, 1996). Interestingly, lipid

peroxidation increased after 20 min of exercise in the white muscle, but not in the red muscle of trained rats (Alessio and Goldfarb, 1989). In another study, 10 weeks of

exercise training of rats did not increase antioxidative enzyme activities but decreased the

MDA level with respect to nontrained animals (Fiebig et aL, 1996). Swim training

(21 weeks) increased catalase activity in mouse heart (Kanter et al., 1985). Eight-weeks of treadmill-running exercise training increased cytosolic and mitochondrial glutathione

peroxidase activities in rat skeletal muscles (Ji, 1993). Sprint training of rats increased the total glutathione content of skeletal muscles and the activity of glutathione peroxidase in heart and skeletal muscles, but had no effect on superoxide activity in either heart or

skeletal muscles (Sen, 1995). Modulation of antioxidant status is not confined to muscle.

Nine-week training of rats resulted in augmented activity of catalase in muscles, testes,

lung, liver, and brain (where the increase was highest -- by 350%), and glutathione

peroxidase in lungs, liver, and brain, and glutathione reductase in the testes. The

adaptation was tissue-specific. Ten-week treadmill training of rats increased GSH content

by 33%, the activity of glutathione peroxidase by 62%, and superoxide dismutase by 27% in deep vastus lateralis; in soleus muscle the GSH level decreased and activities of

glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dimutase remained unchanged (Leeuwenburgh et al., 1997). Exercise training also altered the kinetic properties of antioxidant enzymes

(Somani and Husain, 1996), a result more difficult to interpret, and possibly a result of

post-translational

modifications.

Data on the adaptive increases in the activities of SOD and glutathione peroxidase in rodent diaphragm and SOD in ventricular myocardium indicated that moderate-to-high intensity long-duration exercise is necessary to induce these changes (Powers et al., 1993; Powers and Criswell, 1996). These findings cause some doubt about any beneficial action of occasional physical activity ("weekend athletes") on increasing the antioxidant potential of the body (Clarkson, 1995).

Increased concentrations of antioxidants and augmented antioxidant enzyme activities have also been reported in trained humans (Jenkins, Friedland, and Howald,

K_dziora

-5-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

1984; Caldarera, Guarnieri, and Lazzari, 1973; Tessier et al., 1995; Mena et al., 1991; Duthie, 1996; Robertson et al., 1991; Ortenblad, Madsen, and Djurhus, 1997; Rokitzki

et al., 1994). Exercise training increased catalase activity in rat liver, heart, and skeletal

muscle (Caldarera, Guamieri, and Lazzari, 1973). Comparison of trained, high-aerobic-

capacity subjects ('v" O2,mx > 60 ml kg l. min -l) and low-fit subjects ('v'_

< 60 ml. kg -t. min l)

showed that the high-fit group had significantly higher activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase activities in the vastus lateralis muscle (needle biopsy samples). Moreover,

there was a positive correlation between the VO2m_x and muscle catalase and superoxide

activities (r = 0.72 and 0.60, respectively) (Jenkins, Friedland, and Howald, 1984). Tenweek endurance training increased plasma and erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activities, but reduced erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity (Tessier et al., 1995a). Twenty-day intensive cycling (2,800 km) increased erythrocyte SOD activity (Mena et al., 1991), and an increase in erythrocyte glutathione content was observed in subjects who trained daily by running over a period of at least 2 years (Duthie, 1996). Exercise

training of runners resulted in increases of erythrocyte ot-tocopherol content and

lymphocyte ascorbic acid concentrations. Erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase and catalase activities were significantly and positively correlated with the weekly training distance

(Robertson et al., 1991). Jump-trained humans also had higher levels of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, glutathione peroxidase, and glutathione reductase) in muscle (Ortenblad, Madsen, and Djurhuus, 1997). Data from another study revealed negative correlations between individual aerobic capacity and (1) resting plasma MDA level (r = -0.82) and (2) exercise-induced increase in plasma MDA level (r = -0.81); these correlations suggest a beneficial effect of physical fitness (Sen, 1995). The serum level of TBARS decreased in trained athletes after extreme endurance stress (Rokitzki et al., 1994).

It has been hypothesized that the increased rate of free radical production or the release of some by-products of free radical formation are stimuli for induction of

antioxidant enzymes (Ji, Dillon, and Wu, 1990). One can expect that the increase in activities of antioxidant enzymes and, indirectly, increases in the concentrations of

antioxidants may be mediated by redox-regulated transcription factors such as NF-rd3

(Mihm, Galter, and Droge, 1995). Our findings also point to another mechanism: increases in the activities of antioxidant enzymes (Cu, Zn-SOD, glutathione peroxidase,

and catalase) and diminution of erythrocyte malondialdehyde

(MDA) concentration in the

erythrocytes of exercise-trained subjects during maximal exercise; no such increase was

observed in subjects with low physical endurance (Btaszczyk et al., 1994a; Blaszczyk

et al., 1993; Btaszczyk et al., 1994b; Sibifiska et al., 1997). Similar changes were

observed in blood platelets (Buczyfiski et al., 1990; Buczyfiski et aL, 1991). After 40-min

of exercise at 60% "V'O2n_xin healthy individuals, glutathione peroxidase was increased;

in diabetics it was decresed (Atalay et al., 1997). A postexercise increase in whole-blood

glutathione peroxidase in exercise-trained subjects was found (Asian et al., 1997). Treadmill exercise increased erythrocyte SOD, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase

activities (Das et al., 1993), and cycling exercise at 70% "v'O2m_xincreased the blood

glutathione reductase and glutathione released from the liver into the blood. Exercise

with carbohydrate supplementation

also increased blood glutathione peroxidase and

glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Ji et al., 1993); also, muscle glutathione peroxidase

was found to increase after acute (submaximal + maximal) exercise in trained, but not in

K_dziora

-6-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

untrained, subjects (Tessier et al., 1995b). Glutathione reductase was increased by

treadmill running (60% QO2,,_x) in female athletes (Kanaley and Ji, 1991). In rats

subjected to maximal exercise, erythrocyte catalase activity increased during swimming for up to 6 hr (Tanayeva et aL, 1979). Erythrocyte antioxidant enzyme activities (SOD,

catalase, and glutathione peroxidase) decreased after 60 min of cycling (70% '_O2_x) in

an untrained group, but these decreases did not take place in endurance-trained

subjects

(Toskulkao and Glinsukon, 1996), a result partly compatible with our findings. These

changes may be a result of altered intracellular milieu or of a release of younger blood cells from depots; nevertheless, they may represent an antioxidant mechanism mobilized during exercise.

Beneficial effects of the activation of an antioxidant defense are not limited to physical exercise: they also include increased resistance of rats to ischemia and reperfusion injury (known to be dependent on antioxidant defense) after exercise training (Libonati et aL, 1997; Bersohn and Scheuer, 1978; Kihlstrom, 1990); and physical activity in humans is associated with reduced morbidity and mortality from ischemic heart disease (Blair et al., 1989; Morris et al., 1980). These data support the positive health effects of physical exercise.

However, decreased generation of ROS by granulocytes occurs in exercise-trained subjects, and it is inversely related to their level of physical conditioning (Nieman, 1994). The physiological sequelae of this inverse effect may be harmful as decreased ROS generation impairs the defensive capacity of phagocytes, and trained sportsmen appear to be more prone to upper respiratory tract infections (Peters, 1997).

Numerous though not unequivocal data indicate that antioxidant supplementation

may reduce indices of oxidative stress after intense physical exercise (Jackson, Edwards, and Symons, 1985; Dillard et al., 1978; Davies et al., 1982; Warren et al., 1992). In

exercising rats, vitamin E supplementation reduced the levels of lipid hydroperoxides and

TBARS in blood plasma (Goldfarb et al., 1994; Reznick et al., 1992; Brady, Brady, and Ulrey, 1979), liver, heart, blood, and skeletal muscle (Reznick et al., 1992). Similar

results were obtained in humans (Sumida et al., 1989), including decreased pentane

exhalation during high-altitude exposure in the Himalayas (Gerster, 1991). There is a

protective effect of vitamin E on exercise-induced protein oxidation in skeletal muscle (Reznick et al., 1992), and urinary and muscle lipid peroxidation products were lower in

vitamin E-supplemented subjects (Meydani et al., 1993). N-acetylcysteine

(NAC) has

antioxidant properties in that it scavenges free radicals and acts as a proglutathione drug,

thereby providing cysteine for glutathione biosynthesis; apparently it has no side effects

in humans (Arouma et al., 1989). Not surprisingly, NAC significantly decreased

exercise-induced blood glutathione oxidation in humans and rats (Sen, 1995; Sen et al.,

1994; Sen, Atalay, and H_inninen, 1994). Vitamin C supplementation

reduced the post-

exercise decrease in muscle force observed in trained subjects (Jakeman and Maxwell,

1993). Administration of exogenous glutathione considerably increased (by 100%-

140%) the endurance of mice to physical exercise (Cazzulani, Cassin, and Ceserani, 1991; Novelli, Falsini, and Bracciotti, 1991), and similar effects of vitamin E and spin-

trapping agents were observed in these animals (Novelli, Bracciotti, and Falsini, 1990).

Kqdziora

-7-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Supplementation with antioxidant mixtures may be even more efficient. Results from human studies showed that administering a vitamin mixture containing [3-carotene, vitamin C, and vitamin E for 5 weeks decreased lipid peroxidation both at rest and after
physical exercise at 60% and 90% VO2max (Kanter, Nolte, and Holloszy, 1993) and protected erythrocytes and skeletal muscle form exercise-induced injury (Witt et al., 1992); it did not, however, attenuate muscle damage in subjects exercising at 65% of maximal heart rate (Kanter and Eddy, 1992).

It has been reported that antioxidant supplementation not only attenuates the

oxidative stress of physical exercise, but also improves the physical efficiency of

exercising humans and animals. In vitro experimental data showed that the antioxidant

N-acetylcysteine inhibited development of acute fatigue of rat diaphragm fiber bundles

(Khawli and Reid, 1994). Antioxidant vitamin supplementation can be recommended for individuals performing regular heavy exercise (Dekkers, Doomen, and Kemper, 1996).

On the other hand, antioxidant deficiency diminished and supplementation had beneficial

effects on physical endurance; for example, vitamin E-deficient animals had reduced

physical endurance (Davies et al., 1982; Packer, 1984; Goldfarb and Sen, 1994) and also

showed increased lipid peroxidation, increased susceptibility of skeletal muscle to

damage, and decreased oxidative phosphorylation Glutathione depletion compromised long-duration

in the liver (Goldfarb and Sen, 1994). treadmill running performance (Sen,

Atalay, and Hanninen, 1994) and swimming endurance in mice which suggests that

glutathione homeostasis is essential for the pro-oxidant antioxidant balance during

exercise (Sen, 1995). In humans, vitamin E supplementation for 1.5 months accelerated

recovery from downhill-run-induced vitamin C are more contradictory: exhaustion in vitamin E-deficient

muscle damage (Cannon et al., 1990). Data on

vitamin C supplementation

did not alter run-time to

rats (Gohil et al., 1986), but 2 weeks of vitamin C

supplementation attenuated the exercise-induced

increase in lipid peroxidation in humans

(Goldfarb and Sen, 1994).

In summary, the beneficial effects of activating the antioxidant defense by exercise conditioning are not limited to physical exercise: they may also include

increased resistance to ischemia and reperfusion injury and ischemic heart disease. Data

support the positive health effects of physical exercise. Supplementation with antioxidants and antioxidant mixtures attenuates the free-radical injury induced by

exercise and improves the physical efficiency of exercising persons. Antioxidant vitamin

supplementation

can be recommended for individuals performing regular heavy exercise.

IMMOBILIZATION

AND BED-REST DECONDITIONING

It seems surprising that severe limitation of physical exercise, namely, partial immobilization during prolonged bed rest (BR), results also in symptoms of oxidative stress. This problem may be pertinent to spaceflight deconditioning related to reduced physical exercise. In flight, moreover, astronauts are exposed to an increased flux of

K_dziora

-8-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

cosmic radiation, and there is 100% oxygen in the extravehicular sources of free radicals.

mobility unit; both are

Men subjected to -4.5 degree head-down-tilt BR for 120 days showed increased

lipid peroxidation in skeletal muscle, myocardittm, and plasma which reached a peak at

day 3 and remained elevated at day 60. Erythrocyte SOD decreased gradually during the

120-day BR period, whereas catalase activity showed some initial increase (day 28), then

decreased significantly by day 72, and was normal at day 111 (Zezerov et al., 1989). Our

studies on otherwise healthy persons, who were immobilized because of fractures of their

lower extremities, showed decreased activity of Cu, Zn-SOD in erythrocytes on days 5,

12, 19, 26, and 40 of immobilization (maximally at day 12), decreased catalase activity

during the entire immobilization period, decreased activity of glutathione peroxidase on

day 5, increased activity on day 19, and increased concentration of thiobarbituric acid-

reactive substances (TBARS) after 5, 12, 19, 26, and 40 days of immobilization (Pawlak,

1998). Blood platelet activity of Cu, Zn-SOD, glutathione peroxidase and catalase were

significantly decreased, and lipid peroxidation increased after 14 and 28 days of

immobilization;

later there was a tendency for normalization of all parameters studied

after 90 days (K_dziora and Buczyfiski, 1996; Kafar et al., 1991a; Kafar et al., 1991b).

One consequence of prolonged BR is decreased phagocytosis between days 8 and 14

(Greenleaf and Koztowski, 1982). Because activated phagocytes are an important source

of ROS, this decreased effect also contributes to diminished ROS generation during BR.

We observed in BR subjects decreased basal superoxide generation by circulating

granulocytes after 5, 12, 19, and 26 days, decreased superoxide generation after zymosan

stimulation on days 12, 19, and 26; and decreased nitric oxide release from granulocytes

(both basal and after stimulation with opsonized zymosan), the decrease being maximal

on day 12 (Pawlak, 1998).

Similar results were obtained in animals. Immobilization decreased catalase
activity in rat erythrocytes (Taneyeva et al., 1979), and rats immobilized in a tilted -15 degree head-down position showed increased content of lipid peroxidation products, most notably in blood serum and skeletal muscles (Zezerov, Ivanova, and Ushakov, 1987). After 60 days of immobilization, the content of lipid peroxidation products in plasma decreased but was still higher than that in the control group; it remained high in the liver (Zezerov, Ivanova, and Ushakov, 1987). Shidlovskaya (1985) also showed a progressive increase in lipid peroxidation in skeletal muscle and heart of immobilized rats throughout immobilization. The intensity of this process increased with increasing time of immobilization. After a 7-day flight in the Kosmos 1667 spaceship, rats showed no changes in plasma MDA concentrations or increased antioxidant capacity (Popova et al., 1988), but they had increased activity of total SOD (Cu, Zn-SOD plus Mn-SOD) in the heart and liver homogenates, unchanged SOD activity in muscle homogenates, decreased activity of glutathione peroxidase in skeletal muscles and liver (unchanged in the heart), and no changes of glutathione reductase or catalase activities; tocopherol concentration was higher in the heart and liver and lower in skeletal muscles, and MDA concentration was higher (by about 25%) in the liver and skeletal muscles and unchanged in the heart (Delenyan and Markin, 1989). However, it is probable that the increased gravitational stress during reentry from space could have affected these results. After a 13-day flight in

K_dziora

-9-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

the Kosmos 1887 spacecraft (Markin and Delenyan, 1992) and a 14-day flight in the

Space 2044 spacecraft (Markin and Zhuhavleva, 1993), there was increased plasma

malondialdehyde

concentration and increased hepatic antioxidant enzyme activities in

rats. In contrast, after an 8-day spaceflight (NASA Immune II Mission) rats showed

decreased mRNA levels for Cu, Zn-SOD and glutathione peroxidase, but unchanged

activities of these enzymes; decreases in both mRNA levels and activities of catalase and

glutathione reductase; considerable decreases in reduced, oxidized, and total glutathione concentration; and increased MDA content in the liver (Hollander and Gore, 1998).

These results suggested that GSH could be considered as a dietary supplement during

spaceflight. Cosmonauts who spent 4 to 13 days in space had a decreased concentration of vitamin E in the blood (Belakovsky, Radchenko, and Bogdanov, 1984). Immobilized

rats showed decreased activity ofcytochrome oxidase in the liver, skeletal muscles,

kidneys, and brain on day 15 (Smirnov and Potapov, 1981), and after 30 days there was a

transient increase of cytochrome oxidase activity followed by a progressive decrease to

day 60, and normalization on day 90. Cytochrome oxidase activity in the lungs was lower

on day 60 and increased on day 90 (Smimov and Potapov, 1981). Similar results on

cytochrome oxidase were obtained in rats after spaceflight (Connor and Hood, 1998). Other authors have reported decreased activities of citric acid cycle enzymes in skeletal

muscles (Potapov, 1989) and in the livers (Ganin, 1983) of immobilized rats.

Interestingly, the pool of loosely bound iron was increased after immobilization of rat ankle in planar flexion for 4, 8, or 12 days. There was a significant increase in the soleus iron content and augmentation of TBARS and oxidized glutathione (GSSG) (Kondo et al., 1992a). The latter changes were suppressed by the iron chelator, deferoxamine (Kondo et al., 1992b).

Various mechanisms for the increased lipid peroxidation during deconditioning

hypokinesia have been suggested, including (1) increased activity of the hormonal

component of the sympathicoadrenal

system; (2) accumulation of excessive quantities of

free fatty acids; (3) reduced activity of antioxidant enzymes; and (4) an increase in the

amount of liberated adrenalin; autoxidation of which may be a source ofROS (Zezerov,

Ivanova, and Ushakov, 1987).

In brief we can say that (1) increased free-radical damage occurs during deconditioning hypokinesia; (2) cosmonauts who spent several days in space had decreased levels of vitamin E in their blood; and (3) antioxidants, among them glutathione, may be considered as dietary supplements during spaceflight.

SUMMARY AND POSSIBLE MECHANISMS

It is clear that both strenous physical exercise and deconditioning-immobilization impose oxidative stress on the body, and that systematic exercise training augments antioxidative defense mechanisms in various tissues. In general, it seems that the occurrence of oxidative stress after immobilization is followed by apparent normalization

Kfdziora

- I 0-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning
of the parameters. These responses can be generalized in terms ofpro-oxidant/antioxidant homeostasis (Lewin and Popov, 1994) (homeoredox equilibrium, Fig. 1). It assumes that in tissues and in the body there is a special level of homeostasis, that is, an equilibrium between pro-oxidative reactions and antioxidative defense reactions that prevents uncontrolled oxidative reactions. During exercise this balance is shifted toward oxidative stress that results in a compensatory homeostatic response resulting in reestablishment of equilibrium at the expense of increased production of antioxidants and antioxidant enzymes. Means of attaining equilibrium may also include decreased production of ROS by phagocytes, an effect observed after exercise training.
Figure 1. The idea of homeoredox equilibrium

During the first phase of immobilization, the pro-oxidant antioxidant equilibrium is shifted toward a decrease in pro-oxidant reactions as a result of decreased oxygen
consumption in the muscles. The homeoredox equilibrium is then reestablished by decreased concentration of antioxidants and decreased activities of antioxidant enzymes.
If this process overshoots, a transient oxidative stress appears which, in turn, induces a compensatory increase of the antioxidant defenses that is observed after longer periods of immobilization.

PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS

One application of these findings would be the prevention of oxidative damage

during acute exercise. However, systemic administration of antioxidants during controlled exercise training seems less desirable; instead, the aim of systematic exercise

training would be to increase the natural defense mechanisms of the body; also,

antioxidant supplementation

would diminish the challenge of physical exercise in this

respect. On the other hand, transient antioxidant supplementation might be appropriate

during mobilization after BR deconditioning when the body is tuned to a lower level of

pro-oxidant reaction and antioxidant defense and would adapt to an increased oxidative load.

Our health and longevity are conditioned by the robust but delicate balance

between the pro-oxidant and antioxidant activities of the body. Regular physical exercise

is beneficial in this respect in that it forces adaptation to physiological oxidative stress.

This adaptation may prove useful in situations in which oxidative stress is caused by

pathologic factors such as inflammation or ischemia-reperfusion.

However, since the

system of pro-oxidant/antioxidant

response is always tending toward a dynamic

equilibrium, it should not be expected that increased antioxidant defense induced by exercise training will have a lasting effect; instead, its maintenance requires continuous

systematic physical exercise.

K_dziora

-I I-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

REFERENCES

Alessio, H. M. Exercise-induced 1993.

oxidative stress. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 25: 218-224,

Alessio, H. M., and Goldfarb, A. H. Lipid peroxidation and scavenger enzymes during exercise: Adaptive response to training. J. Appl. Physiol. 64: 1333-1336, 1989.

Ames, B. N., Shigenaga, M. K., and Hagen, T. M. Oxidants, antioxidants, and the degenerative diseases of aging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 7915-7922, 1993.

Aruoma, O. I., Halliwel, B., Hoey, B. M., and Butler, J. The antioxidant action of Nacetylcysteine: its reaction with hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical, superoxide, and hypochlorous acid. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 6: 593-597, 1989.

Asian, R., Sekeroglu, M. R., Gultekin, F., and Bayiroglu, F. Blood lipoperoxidation

and

antioxidant enzymes in healthy individuals: relation to age, sex, habits, life style, and

environment. J. Environ. Sci. Health 104A: 2101-2109, 1997.

Atalay, M., Laaksonen, D. E., Niskanen, Altered antioxidant enzyme defences increased resting and exercise-induced 195-201, 1997.

L., Uusitupa, M., Hanninen, O., and Sen, C. K.

in insulin-dependent

diabetic men with

oxidative stress. Acta Physiol. Scand. 161:

Balke, P. O., Snider, M. T., and Bull, A. P. Evidence for lipid peroxidation moderate exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 16:181, 1984. (Abstract)

during

Barclay, J. K., and Hansel, M. Free radicals may contribute to oxidative skeletal muscle fatigue. Can. ,I. Physiol. Pharmacol. 69: 279-284, 1991.

Belakovsky, M. S., Radchenko, N. D., and Bogdanov, N. G. Vitamin metabolism in cosmonauts atler short-term flights. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 18:19-22, 1984.

Belcastro, A. N., Arthur, G. D., Albisser, T. A., and Raj, D. A. Heart, liver, and skeletal

muscle myeloperoxidase 1996.

activity during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 80:1331-1335,

Bersohn, M. M., and Scheuer, J. Effect of ischemia on the performance physically trained rats. Am. J. Physiol. 234: 215-218, 1978.

of hearts from

Blair, S. N., Koho, H. W., Paffenbarger, R. S., Clark, D. G., Cooper, K. H., and Gibbons,

L. W. Physical fitness and all-cause mortality: a prospective and women. J.A.M.A. 262: 2395-2401, 1989.

study of healthy men

K_dziora

- 12-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Btaszczyk, J., K_dziora, H., Pastuszka, M., Sibifiska, E., K_dziora,

Wptyw submaksymalnego

wysilaku fizycznego na peroksydacj_

enzymatyczny uktad antyoksydacyjny

w krwinkach czerwonych

Wych. Fiz. Sport. 1: 53-60, 1994a.

J., and Pa_nik, J. lipid6w oraz u ludzi zdrowych.

B]aszczyk, J., Sibifiska, E., K_dziora, J., K_dziora-Kornatowska,

K., W_clewska, U., and

Paszkowski, J. Stopiefi peroksydacji lipid6w oraz aktywno_d katalazy w krwinkach

czerwonych u ludzi zdrowych podczas submaksymalnego

wysitku fizycznego i

restytucji. Wych. Fiz. Sport. 41: 41-46, 1993.

Blaszczyk, J., Sibifiska, E., K_dziora, J. et al. Aktywno_6 antyoksydacyjna

i procesy

peroksydacji lipid6w w krwinkach czerwonyeh podczas submaksymalnego

wysitku

fizycznego. Med. Sport. 32: 3-5, 1994b.

Blum, J., and Fridovich, I. Inactivation of glutathione Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 240: 500-508, 1985.

peroxidase

by superoxide

radical.

Boveris, A., and Chance, B. The mitochondrial generation of hydrogen peroxide: general

properties and effects of hyperbaric oxygen. Biochem. J. 134:707-716,

1973.

Brady, P. S., Brady, L. J., and Ulrey, D. E. Selenium, vitamin E, and the response to

swimming stress in the rat. J. Nutr. 109:1103-1109,

1979.

Brady, P. S., Shelle, J. E., and Ullrey, D. E. Rapid changes in equine erythrocyte glutathione reductase with exercise. Am. J. Vet. Res. 38: 1045-1048, 1977.

Buczyfiski, A., K_dziora, J., Biaszczyk, J., Kafa, K., Zotyfiski, K., and Nawarycz, T.

Peroksydacja lipid6w krwinek ptytkowych u ludzi w stanie hipokinezji i po

obci_geniu submaksymalnym

wysi|kiem fizycznym. Wych. Fiz. Sport. 34: 43-49,

1990.

Buczyfiski, A., K_dziora, J., Tkaczewski, W., and Wachowicz, B. Effect of submaximal physical exercise on antioxidative protection of human blood platelets. Int. J. Sports Med. 12: 52-54, 1991.

Caldarera, C. M., Guarnieri, C., and Lazzari, F. Catalase and peroxidase cardiac muscle. Boll. Soc. Ital. Biol. Sper. 49: 72-77, 1973.

activity of

Cannon, J. G., Orencole, S. F., Fielding, R. A. et al. Acute phase response in exercise: Interaction of age and vitamin E on neutrophils and muscle enzyme release. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 259: R1214-R1219, 1990.
Cazzulani, P., Cassin, M., and Ceserani, R. Increased endurance to physical exercise in mice given oral reduced glutathione (GSH). Med. Sci. Res. 19: 543-544, 1991.

K_dziora

- 13-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Clarkson, P. M. Antioxidants 131-141, 1995.

and physical performance.

Crit. Rev. FoodSci. Nutr. 35:

Connor, M. K., and Hood, D. A. Effect of microgravity on the expression of mitochondrial enzymes in rat cardiac and skeletal muscles. J. Appl. Physiol. 598, 1998.

84: 593-

Das, S. K., Hinds, J. E., Hardy, R. E., Collins, J. C., and Mukherjee, S. Effects of physical stress on peroxide scavengers in normal and sickle cell trait erythrocytes. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 14: 139-147, 1993.

Davies, K. J. A., Quintanilha, A. T., Brooks, G. A., and Packer, L. Free radicals and
tissue damage produced by exercise. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 107:1198-1205, 1982.

Dekkers, J. C., Doornen, L. J., Kemper, H. C. The role of antioxidant vitamins and

enzymes in the prevention of exercise-induced

muscle damage. Sports Med. 21:213-

238, 1996.

Delenyan, N. V., and Markin, A. A. Lipid peroxidation in rats after 7-day flight on Cosmos-1967. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 23: 34-37, 1989.

Diem, K., and Lentner, C., editors. Scientific Tables. Documenta Basel, 1970.

Geigy, 7th ed., Geigy:

Dillard, C. J., Litov, R. E., Savin, W. M., and Tappel, A. L. Effects of exercise, vitamin E and ozone on pulmonary function and lipid peroxidation. J. Appl. Physiol. 45: 927932, 1978.

Duthie, G. G. Adaptations of the antioxidative Sports Sci. 41: 95-101, 1996.

defence system to chronic exercises. Med.

Duthie, G. G., Robertson, status and erythrocyte Biophys. 282: 78-83,

J. D., Maughan, lipid peroxidation 1990.

R. J., and Mortice, P. C. Blood antioxidant following distance running. Arch. Biochem.

Ehn, L., Carlmark, B., and Hoglund, S. Ion status in athletes involved in intense physical activity. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 12: 61-64, 1980.

Fiebig, R., Gore, M. T., Chandwaney, R., Leeuwenburgh, C., and Ji, L. L. Alteration of myocardial antioxidant enzyme activity and glutathione content with aging and exercise training. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 19: 83-89, 1996.

Ganin, Y. A. Activity of oxidative enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle in the liver of hypokinetic rats. Kosm. Biol. ,4viakosm. Med. 17: 67-71, 1983.

K_dziora

- 14-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Gee, D. L., and Tappel, A. L. The effect of exhaustive exercise on expired pentane as a measure of in vivo lipid peroxidation in the rat. Life Sci. 28: 2425-2429, 1981.

Gerster, H. Function of vitamin E in physical exercise: a review. Z. Ernahrungswiss.

30:

89-97, 1991.

Gohil, K., Packer, L., De Lumen, B., Brooks, G. A., and Terblanche, deficiency and vitamin C supplements: exercise and mitochondrial Physiol. 60: 1986-1991, 1986.

S. E. Vitamin E oxidation. J. Appl.

Gohil, K., Viguie, C., Stanley, W. C., Brooks, G. A., and Packer, L. Blood glutathione oxidation during human exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 64:115-119, 1988.

Goldfarb, A. H., Mclnstosh, M. K., Boyer, indexes of lipid peroxidation in muscle Appl. Physiol. 76: 1630-1635, 1994.

B. T., and Fatouros, from DHEA-treated

J. Vitamin E effects on and exercised rats. J.

Goldfarb, A., and Sen, C. K. Antioxidant supplementation and the control of oxygen toxicity during exercise. In Exercise and Oxygen Toxicity, edited by C. K. Sen, L. Packer, and O. Harminen, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1994, pp. 163-189.

Greenleaf, J. E., and Koztowski, S. Physiological consequences of reduced physical activity during bed rest. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev. 10: 84-120, 1982.

Haymes, E. M. Nutritional concerns: need for iron. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 19: 197-200, 1987.

Hellsten, Y. The role ofxanthine oxidase in exercise. edited by C. K. Sen, L. Packer, and O. Hanninen, 211-234.

In Exercise and Oxygen Toxicity, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1993, pp.

Higuchi, M., Cartier, L. J., Chert, M., and Holoszy, J. O. Superoxide dismutase and catalase in skeletal muscle: adaptive response to exercise. J. Gerontol. 40:281-286, 1985.

Hollander, J., Gore, M. Spaceflight downregulates antioxidant defense systems in rat liver. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 24: 385-390, 1998.

Jackson, M. J., Edwards, R. H. T., and Symons, M. R. C. Electron spin resonance studies

of intact mammalian skeletal muscle. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 847:185-190,

1985.

Jakeman, P., and Maxwell, S. Effect of antioxidant vitamin supplementation

on muscle

function after eccentric exercise. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 67: 426-430, 1993.

Jenkins, R. R. Exercise, oxidative stress, and antioxidants: 356-375, 1993.

a review. Int. J. Sport Nutr. 3:

K_dziora

- i 5-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Jenkins, R. R., Friedland, superoxide dismutase Med. 5:11-14, 1984.

R., and Howald, H. The relationship of oxygen uptake to and catalase activity in human skletal muscle. Int. J. Sports

Jenkins, R. R., Krause, K., and Schofield, L. S. Influence of exercise on clearance of oxidant stress products and loosely bound iron. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 25: 213-217, 1993.

Ji, L. L. Antioxidant 225-231, 1993.

enzyme response to exercise and aging. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 25:

Ji, L. L., Dillon, D., and Wu, E. Alteration of antioxidant skeletal muscle and liver. Am. J. PhysioL Regulatory R918-R923, 1990.

enzymes with aging in rat Integrative Comp. Physiol. 258:

Ji, L. L., Katz, A., Fu, R., Griffiths, M., and Spencer, M. Blood glutathione status during exercise: effect of carbohydrate supplementation. J. Appl. Physiol. 74: 788-792, 1993.

Ji, L. L., and Leeuwenburgh, C. Exercise and glutathione. In Pharmacology in Exercise and Sports, edited by S. Somani, CRC: Boca Raton, FL, 1995, pp. 94-123.

Kafar, K., Buczyfiski, A., Zotyfiski, K., and K_dziora, J. St_Zenie dialdehydu

malonowego (MDA) oraz aktywno_6 dysmutazy ponadtlenkowej (SOD-1) w

krwinkach ptytkowych 32-34, 1991a.

u osrb w stanie dtugotrwatej

hipokinezji.

Kwart. Ortoped. 1:

Kafar, K., Buczyfiski, A., Zotyfiski, K., and K_dziora, J. Aktywno_6 peroksydazy glutationowej (GPx) oraz katalazy (CAt) w krwinkach ptytkowych u os6b przebywaja_cych w stanie 28-dniowej hipokinezji. Kwart. Ortoped. 1: 35-37,

1991b.

Kanaley, J. A., and Ji, L. L. Antioxidant enzyme activity during prolonged exercise in amenorrheic and eumenorrheic athletes. Metabolism 40: 88-92, 1991.

Kanter, M. M., and Eddy, D. D. Effect of antioxidant of lipid peroxidation and skeletal muscle damage Sci. Sports Exerc. 24: S17, 1992.

supplementation

on serum markers

following eccentric exercise. Med.

Kanter, M. M., Hamlin, R. R., Unverferth, D. V., Davis, M. V., and Merola, A. J. Effect of exercise training on antioxidant enzymes and cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin. J Appl. Physiol. 59: 1298-1303, 1985.

Kanter, M. M., Nolte, L. A., and Holloszy, J. O. Effects of an antioxidant vitamin mixture on lipid peroxidation at rest and post-exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 74: 965-969, 1993.

K_dziora

- 16-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

K_dziora, J., and Buczyfiski, A. Antioxidative enzyme activities and lipid peroxidation indicators in blood platelets during bed rest. Int. J. Occup. Med. Environ. Health 9: 45-51, 1996.

Keul, J., Koenig, D., Huonker, M., and Berg, A. Nutrition, sport, and muscular stress tolerance. Dtsch. Zeit. Sportmed. 228: 230-237, 1996.

Khawli, F. A., and Reid, M. B. N-Acetylcysteine

depresses contractile function and

inhibits fatigue of diaphragm in vitro. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 77:317-324, 1994.

Kihlstrom, M. Protection effect of endurance training against reoxygenation-induced injuries in rat heart. ,7..Appl. Physiol. 68: 1672-1678, 1990.
Kim, J. D., Yu, B. P., McCarter, R. J., Lee, S. Y., and Herlihy, J. T. Exercise and diet modulate cardiac lipid peroxidation and antioxidant defenses. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 20: 83-88, 1996.
Kondo, H., and Itokawa, Y. Oxidative stress in muscular atrophy. In Exercise and Oxygen Toxicity, edited by C. K. Sen, L. Packer, O. H_inninen, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1994, pp. 319-342.
Kondo, H., Miura, M., Kodama, J., Ahmed, S. M., and Itokawa, Y. Role of iron in oxidative stress in skeletal muscle atrophied by immobilization. Pfliigers Arch. 421: 295-297, 1992a.
Kondo, H., Miura, M., Nakagaki, I., Sasak.i S., and Itokawa, Y. Trace element movement and oxidative stress in skeletal muscle atrophied by immobilization. Am. ,7. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 262: E583-E590, 1992b.

Kretzschmar, M., Miiller, D., Hilbscher, J., Matin, E., and Klinger, W. Influence of aging, training and acute exercise on plasma glutathione and lipid peroxides in man. Int. J. Sports Med. 12: 218-222, 1991.

Kumar, C. T., Reddy, V. K., Prasad, M., Thyagaraju, K., and Reddanna, P. Dietary

supplementation of vitamin E protects heart tissue from exercise-induced stress. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 111: 109-115, 1992.

oxidant

Leeuwenburgh, C., Hollander, J., Leichtweis, S., Griffiths, M., Gore, M., and Ji, L. L. Adaptations of glutathione antioxidant system to endurance training are tissue and muscle fiber specific. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 272: R363-R369, 1997.

Leeuwenburgh, biochemical 1995.

C., and Ji, L. L. Glutathione depletion in rested and exercised mice: consequence and adaptation. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 316:941-949,

K_dziora

- 17-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Leeuwenburgh, C., Leiehtweis, S., Hollander, J. R. F., Gore, M., and Ji, L. L. Effect of exercise on glutathione deficient heart. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 156: 17-24, 1996.

Lew, H., Pyke, S., and Quintanilha, A. Changes in glutathione status of plasma, liver and muscle following exhaustive exercise in rats. FEBS Lett.185: 262-266, 1985.

Lewin, G., and Popov, I. The antioxidant system of the organism. Theoretical practical consequences. Med. Hypoth. 42: 269-275, 1994.

basis and

Libonati, J. R., Gaughan, J. P., Hefner, Reduced ischemia and reperfusion Sports Exerc. 29: 509-516, 1997.

C. A., Gow, A., Paolone, injury following exercise

A. M., and Houser, training. Med. Sci.

S. R.

Lovlin, R., Cottle, W., Cavanagh, M., and Belcastro, A. L. Are indices of free radical damage related to exercise intensity? Eur. ,1. Appl. Physiol. 56: 313-316, 1987.

Markin, A. A., and Delenyan, N. V. Lipid peroxidation and the system of antioxidant protection in rats following a 13-day spaceflight on the KOSMOS 1887 biosatellite. Aviakosm. Ekologich. Med. 26: 43-50, 1992.

Markin, A. A., and Zhuhavleva, A. O. Lipid peroxidation and antioxidant defense system in rats after a 14-day spaceflight in the Space 2044 spacecraft. Aviakosm. Ekologich. Med. 27: 47-50, 1993.

Maughan, R. J., Donnelly, A. E., Gleeson, M., Whiting, P. H., Walker, Clough, P. J. Delayed-onset muscle damage and lipid peroxidation downhill run. Muscle Nerve 12: 332-336, 1989.

K. A., and in man after a

Mena, P., Maynar, M., Gutierez, J. M., Maynar, Erythrocyte free radical scavenger enzymes to training. Int. ,I. Sports Med. 12: 563-566,

J., Timon, J., and Campillo, J. E. in bicycle professional racers: adaptation 1991.

Meydani, M., Evans, W. J., Handelman, G. et al. Protective effect of vitamin E on

exercise-induced

oxidative damage in young and older adults. Am. ,I. Physiol.

Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 264: R992-R998, 1993.

Mihm, S., Galter, D., and Droge, W. Modulation of transcription factor NF-kB activity

by intracellular glutathione levels and by variations of extracellular FASEB J. 9: 246-252, 1995.

cysteine supply.

Morris, J. N., Pollard, R., Everitt, M. G., and Chave, S. P. W. Vigorous exercise in

leisure-time: Protection against coronary heart disease. Lancet 2:1207-1210,

1980.

Nieman, D. Exercise, upper respiratory infections and the immune system. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 26: 128-139, 1994.

K_dziora

- 18-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Novelli, G. P., Bracciotti, G., and Falsini, S. Spin-trappers and vitamin E prolong endurance to muscle fatigue in mice. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 8: 9-13, 1990.

Novelli, G. P., Falsini, S., and Bracciotti, G. Exogenous glutathione increases endurance to muscle effort in mice. Pharmacol. Res. 23: 149-155, 1991.

Oh-ishi, S., Kizak,i T., Ookawara, T. et al. The effect of exhaustive exercise on the

antioxidant enzyme system in skeletal muscle from calcium-deficient

rats. Pflfigers

Arch. 435: 767-774, 1998.

Ohtsuka, Y., Yabunaka, N., Fujisawa, H., Kamimura, H., and Agishi, Y. Effect of longdistance running and exercise with a bicycle ergometer on the erythrocyte antioxidative defense system. Jpn. J. Phys. Fitness Sports Med. 43: 277-282, 1994.

Ortenblad, N., Madsen, K., and Djurhuus, M. S. Antioxidant status and lipid peroxidation after short-term maximal exercise in trained and untrained humans. Am. J Physiol.
Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 272: R1258-R1263., 1997.

Packer, L. Vitamin E, physical exercise, and tissue damage in animals. Med. Biol. 62: 105-109, 1984.

Packer, L. Oxidants, 1997.

antioxidant

nutrients and the athlete. J. Sports Sci. 15: 353-363,

Pawlak, W. Effect of posttraumatic hypokinesia enzymatic antioxidant defense mechanisms. University, L6dŁ, Poland, 1998.

on the free radical processes and Doctoral Dissertation, Military Medical

Pereira, B., Cuff, R., Kokubun, E., and Bechara, E. J. H. 5-Aminolevulinic alterations of oxidative metabolism in sedentary and exercise-trained Physiol. 72: 226-230, 1992.

acid-induced rats. J. Appl.

Peters, E. M. Exercise, immunology, and upper respiratory tract infections. Int. J Sports Med. 18 (Suppl. 1): $69-$77, 1997.

Pigeolet, E., Corbisier, P., Houbion, A. et al. Glutathione peroxidase, superoxide

dismutase, and catalase inactivation by peroxides and oxygen-derived

free radicals.

Mech. Ageing Dev. 51 : 283-297, 1990.

Popova, I. A., Afonin, B. V., Vetrova, E. G. et al. Homeostatic reactions in blood of Cosmos-1667 rats. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 22: 39-42, 1988.

Potapov, P. P. Changes in mitochondrial oxidative recovery after hypokinesia of varying duration. 67, 1989.

enzymes in rat skeletal Kosm. BioL Aviakosm.

muscles during Med. 23: 65-

K_dziora

- 19-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Powers, S. K., and Criswell, D. Adaptive strategies of respiratory muscles in response to

endurance exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 28:1115-1122,

1996.

Powers, S. K., Criswell, D., Lawler, J. et al. Rigorous exercise training increases superoxide dismutase activity in ventricular myocardium. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Physiol. 265: H2094-H2098, 1993.

Circ.

Rajguru, S. U., Yeargans, G. S., and Seidler, N. W. Exercise rat skeletal muscle microsomes while increasing cellular 149-157, 1994.

causes oxidative damage to sulfhydryls. Life Sci. 54:

Reznick, A. Z., Witt, E., Matsumoto, M., and Packer, L. Vitamin E inhibits protein oxidation in skeletal muscle of resting and exercise rats. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 189: 801-806, 1992.

Robertson, J. D., Maughan, R. J., Duthie, G. G., and Morrice, P. C. Increased blood oxidant systems of rurmers in response to training load. Clin. Sci. 80:611-618, 1991.

Rokitzki, L., Logemann, E., Sagredos, A. N., Murphy, M., Wetzel-Roth, W., and Keul, J. Lipid peroxidation and antioxidative vitamins under extreme endurance stress. Acta Physiol. Scand. 151: 149-158, 1994.
Sen, C. K. Oxidants and antioxidants in exercise. J.Appl. Physiol. 79: 675-686, 1995.

Sen, C. K., Atalay, M., and H_minen, O. Exercise-induced

oxidative stress: glutathione

supplementation and deficiency. J. Appl. Physiol. 77:2177-2187,

1994.

Sen, C. K., Rahkila, P., and Harminen, O. Glutathione metabolism in skeletal muscle derived cells of the L6 line. Acta Physiol. Scand. 148: 21-26, 1993.

Sen, C. K., Rankinen, T., V_is/tnen, S., and Rauramaa,

exercise: effect of N-acetylcysteine 1994.

supplementation.

R. Oxidative stress after human Jr. Appl. Physiol. 76: 2570-2577,

Shidlovskaya, T. E. Intensity of lipid peroxidation Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 19: 45-48, 1985.

in tissues of hypokinetic

rats. Kosm.

Sibifiska, E., Biaszczyk, J., Kowalczyk, P., K_dziora, J., and Lewicki, R. Research on the activity of Cu,Zn-SOD at the maximum height of physical strain among people of different levels of physical efficiency. Wych. Fiz. Sport. 3: 65-70, 1997.

Sj6din, B., and Westing, Y. H. Changes uric acid in man with short-distance Scand. 148: 21-26, 1990.

in plasma concentration of hypoxanthine and running at various intensities. Acta Physiol.

K_dziora

-20-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Smimov, V. V., and Potapov, P. P. Activity of succinate dehydrogenase and cytochrome oxidase in hypokinetic rats. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 15: 69-71, 1981.

Somani, S. M. Influence of exercise-induced stress on the central nervous system. In Exercise and Oxygen Toxicity, edited by C. K. Sen, L. Packer, and O. Harminen, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 1994, pp. 463-479.

Somani, S. M., and Husain, K. Exercise training alters kinetics of antioxidant rat tissue. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Int. 38: 587-595, 1996.

enzymes in

Sumida, S., Tanaka, K., Kitao, H., and Nakadomo, F. Exercise-induced and leakage of enzymes before and after vitamin E supplementation. 21: 835-838, 1989.

lipid peroxidation Int. J. Biochem.

Taneyeva, G. V., Potapovich, G. M., Voloshko, erythrocyte count, hemoglobin, and catalase muscular activity and restoration. Izv. Akad.

N. A., and Uteshev, A. B. Dynamics activity in rat blood in hypokinesia, NaukKaz. SSR, Ser. Biol. 1: 71-74,

of 1979.

Tessier, F., Hida, H., Favier, A., and Marconnet, P. Muscle GSH-Px activity after

prolonged exercise, training, and selenium supplementation.

Biol. Trace Elem. Res.

47: 279-285, 1995b.

Tessier, F., Margaritis, I., Richard, M. J., Moynot, C., and Marconnet, P. Selenium and training effects on the glutathione system in response to exercise and training, and aerobic performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 27: 390-396, 1995a.
Toskulkao, C., and Glinsukon, T. Endurance exercise and muscle damage: relationship to lipid peroxidation and scavenging enzymes in short and long distance runners. Jpn. J. Phys. Fitness Sports Med. 45: 63-70, 1996.

Venditti, P., and Di Meo, S. Antioxidants, tissue damage, and endurance in trained and untrained young male rats. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 331: 63-68, 1996.

Venditti, P., and Di Meo, S. Effect of trainng on antioxidant capacity, tissue damage, and endurance of adult male rats. Int. J. Sports Med. 18: 497-502, 1997.

Viguie, C. A., Frei, B., Shigenaga, M. K., Ames, B. N., Packer, L., and Brooks, G. A. Oxidant stress in human beings during consecutive days of exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 22:86S, 1990.

Viguie, C. A., Frei, B., Shigenaga, M. K., Ames, B. N., Packer, L., and Brooks, G. A. Antioxidant status and indexes of oxidative stress during consecutive days of exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 75: 566-572, 1993.

K_dziora

-2 ! -

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Warren, J. A., Jenkins, R. R., Packer, L., Witt, E. H., and Armstrong, P. B. Elevated

muscle vitamin E does not attenuate eccentric exercise-induced

muscle injury. J.

Appl. Physiol. 72: 2168-2175, 1992.

Witt, E. H., Reznick, oxidative damage 1992.

A. Z., Viguie, C. A., Stark-Reed, P., and Packer, and effects of antioxidant manipulation. J. Nutr.

L. Exercise, 122: 766-773,

Zezerov, A. E., Ivanova, S. M., Morukov, B. V., and Ushakov, A. S. Lipid peroxidation in the human blood during a 120-day period of anti-orthostatic hypokinesia. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 23: 28-33, 1989.

K_dziora

-22-

Free Radical Processes in Conditioning and Deconditioning

Figure. 1. The idea ofhomeoredox

equilibrium

Point of homeoredox equilibrium

Pro-
oxidants

Antioxidants

K_dziora

-23-

,,'h)/__
Point of homeoredox equilibrium

I°x' IrI°nts

I oxiAdnatni-ts I

Kedjora Fig. 1.1

g

T

5. WATER IMMERSION

DECONDITIONING

IN MEDICINE

Andrzej Wicek*, Michet Nowicki °, and Franciszek Kokot"

Give me health and a day and I will make the

pomp of emperors ridiculous.

EMERSON

INTRODUCTION

Hydrotherapy, one of the oldest of the therapeutic methods, has been used for more than 20 centuries (Krizek, 1963). However, it was not until 1847 that scientific examination of the water immersion (WI) model was begun (Hartshorne, 1847). At that time, Hartshorne recognized the diuretic response to immersion and proposed a mechanism for the diuresis, that is, that the heart posesses volume receptors capable of sensing the fullness of the blood stream as modified by WI (Hartshorne, 1847). Although Bazett et al. (1924) were the pioneers of a systematic examination of the influence of WI on the human body, it was the advent of the space program that gave a new impetus to the use of WI as a nonaggressive investigative tool (Norsk and Epstein, 1991). Studies performed on astronauts revealed a significant hypovolemia and a decrease in total body water, a consequence of the headward redistribution of body fluids that takes place in a gravity-free environment (Graveline and McCally, 1962; Leach, 1987; Lutwak et al., 1969; Leach and Rambaut, 1977). Because some of the responses to WI mimic some of those to weightlessness deconditioning, the WI model has attracted wide interest as a means for studying the influence of weightlessness on hemodynamic, metabolic, and nervous system processes on Earth.

In human studies in which WI is used as an analog of weightlessness it is

necessary to maintain the water bath temperature at 34.5 °C (94.1 °F) to assure body

thermoneutrality.

Alteration of bath temperature significantly influences the

physiological (especially the cardiovascular) responses to immersion. Weston et al.

(1987) characterized the cardiovascular response to WI at different temperatures. They

"Department of Nephrology, Endrocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases, Silesian University School of Medicine, Katowice, Poland

fj
Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
found that cardiac output rose progressively to reach 12% at high water temperature [39 °C (102.2 °F)] and that circulatory vascular peripheral resistance decreased progressively with increasing temperature. At 39 °C (102.2 °F) tachycardia occurs and contributes to the markedly augmented cardiac output. Finally, increasing the water temperature diminishes natriuresis. These responses suggested the importance of maintaining a neutral water temperature to avoid confounding influences on cardiovascular and renal hemodynamics and excretory function. Special thermal homeostatic controllers are used to maintain a constant thermoneutral water temperature [34 °C - 35 °C (93.2 °F - 95 °F)] (Peterson, Benjamin, and Hurst, 1987) throughout the immersion protocol.
Utilization of WI in studies of humans was established in the early 1900s. At present there are no standard or uniform experimental procedures. Several modifications of WI procedures have been proposed, because the testing procedures used in WI studies have varied markedly. For example, it is important that the body be immersed up to the neck and that a semirecumbent body position be maintained. In this position, the hydrostatic pressure exerted on the body redistributes blood and body fluids upward toward volume receptors. Some investigators have used a special table installed in the water baths that can be used to tilt the body forward, backward, and laterally. Several highly sophisticated immersion facilities have also been introduced for monitoring physiological reactions (Koepke and DiBona, 1987).
Immersion media vary, but tap water is usually used; exceptions include various solutions of sodium chloride (Graybiel and Clark, 1961; Howard et aL, 1967). Ish-Shalom and Better (1984) carried out a WI study in the extremely hypertonic water of the Dead Sea and concluded that the saline bath induced a more profound effect on circulatory homeostasis than did tap water. Finally, Webb and Annis (1966) used a silicon fluid as an immersion medium to reduce skin maceration during prolonged immersion.

PHYSIOLOGICAL

ALTERATIONS

INDUCED BY WATER IMMERSION

Hemodynamlc Changes
In the first 20-30 min of WI, plasma volume increases by 8.3% (Khosla and DuBois, 1981) to 9% (McCally, 1964). There are some differences between measured and calculated changes of plasma volumes, but the differences are probably a result of variable changes in red blood cell volume during WI.
Following the highest increase in plasma volume after about 20 min of WI there is a subsequent linear decrease of plasma volume (Greenleaf, 1984). This increase in plasma volume is a result of marked redistribution of body fluids, especially from the interstitial space, with a relative increase in central blood volume. The central hemodynamic alterations induced by W/are identical to those obtained by infusion of 2 liters of saline solution during 120 min (Levinson et al., 1977). The magnitude of these hemodynamic effects is dependent on the specific weight and temperature of the

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-2-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

immersion fluid used, on the depth of the bath, and on the duration of the WI (Aborelius, Balldin, and Lilja, 1972; Epstein, 1976; Greenleaf, 1984). As a consequence of increased mechanical pressure on tissues and of abdominal compression induced by WI, there is an isotonic shift of interstitial fluid into the vascular space, at least during the first hour of WI (Greenleaf et aI., 1980; Greenleaf, Shvartz, and Kravik, 1981). Hyponatremia is not a consistent finding during WI (Epstein, Katsikas, and Duncan, 1973; Epstein, Preston, and Weitzman, 1981). During WI, mean cardiac output increases by 32% and mean stroke volume by 35% (Aborelius, Balldin, and Lilja, 1972); both the right atrial and pulmonary arterial transmural pressure gradients increase. Systemic vascular resistance increases by about 35% (Aborelius, Balldin, and Lilja, 1972; Echt, Lange, and Gauer, 1974).

In healthy subjects, WI results in an increase of heart volume by 180 + 62 ml (Lange et at, 1974). The increase in cardiac index is dependent on the age of the subjects. WI increased the cardiac output of healthy elderly subjects by 59% and of young subjects by only 22% (Thames, 1977).

There are discrepancies in published estimates of the changes that occur in blood pressure during WI. It had been suggested that systemic blood pressure was unchanged during WI (Epstein, 1978); however, data from more recent studies (Norsk, BondePetersen, and Warberg, 1985, 1986; Chudek, Wicek, and Kokot, 1997) indicate significant decreases in blood pressure. A greater decrease in blood pressure was observed in hypertensive than in normotensive subjects (Coruzzi et al., 1985b).

The increase of central blood volume is accompanied by decreases of interstitial

fluid volume and plasma osmolality. The exact mechanism of WI-induced hemodilution

is not clear. It was calculated that the leg fluid volume of healthy subjects decreased by

192 + 20 ml during WI (Tajima et al., 1989). More recent data suggest that this decrease

is caused by a shift of fluid not only from the interstitial space, but also from the

intracellular fluid compartment into the vascular space (Hinghofer-Szalkay,

Harrison, and

Greenleaf, 1987; Miki, Hajduczok, and Hong, 1987).

Respiratory Changes

Water immersion induces upward movement of the diaphragm and causes

depressed respiratory function. It decreases total lung capacity by 3%-10%, vital capacity by 3%-5%, and functional residual capacity by 40% (Prefaut et al., 1979); pulmonary

compliance remains unchanged (Lundgreen, 1984; Boehm, and Ekert, 1938). Reduction of the total lung capacity is mainly a result' of increased hydrostatic pressure on the chest and increased intrathoracic blood volume. WI also induces a more uniform redistribution

of the ventilation/perfusion

(Q/V) ratio in the lungs (Lundgreen, 1984).

In spite of the significant increase that WI causes in the intravascular space of the pulmonary capillaries, neither tissue nor capillary blood volume changes during WI (Begin et al., 1976).

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-3-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
The fact that vital capacity does not change suggests that the increase of central blood volume during WI does not induce a shift of fluid into lung interstitial tissue (Begin et aL, 1976). By increasing diuresis, WI prevents pulmonary overhydration.

Renal Changes

Since WI causes central volume expansion, some compensatory mechanisms counteracting these hemodynamic alterations may be expected. In fact, WI induces a significant diuresis, natriuresis, and kaliuresis. In 1951 Cargill, Sellers, and Shure first reported that normal subjects immersed in water in the upright position to heart level showed an increase in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and not a decrease, as had been observed during the upright position in air. Recent data suggest that GFR (assessed by inulin clearance) does not change during WI, whereas renal blood flow increases significantly by about 15% (Coruzzi et al., 1986; Coruzzi et at, 1984; Myers et al., 1988). The magnitude of these effects is dependent on the state of hydration and sodiumpotassium balance (Nakamitsu et al., 1994); consequently there is a small but significant decline (by 2%) in the filtration fraction.

Intrarenal venous pressure (as an index ofperitubular hydrostatic capillary pressure) increases owing to renal vasodilatation during the first hour of immersion; there is a further increment in the second hour. Analysis of the transglomerular dextran transport indicates that glomerular capillary pressure declines in response to WI (Myers et al., 1988). Consistently, calculated renal vascular resistance (RVR) decreases by 16%
to 33% during WI (Nakamitsu et al., 1994; Coruzzi et al., 1988a).

The exact mechanism of WI-induced diuresis and natriuresis is complex. It seems

that suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone

(RAA) system (Coruzzi et al.,

1984; Coruzzi et al., 1986; Myers et al., 1988), vasopressin secretion (Epstein, 1976;

Dutawa, Kokot, and Grzeszczak, 1987; Harrison et al., 1986), and activity ofthe

sympathetic nervous system (Epstein, Larios, and Johnson, 1985; O'Hare, Dalton, and Roland, 1986b), as well as stimulation of renal prostaglandin synthesis (Nakamitsu et al.,

1994; Epstein et al., 1979) and secretion ofnatriuretic factors (Coruzzi et al., 1986;

Pandergast et al., 1987; Epstein, 1992) contribute to the increased WI-induced excretion

of water, sodium, and potassium by the kidneys.

As mentioned above, WI induces a significant increase in the central blood

volume and, consequently, in renal blood flow. However, some evidence suggests that WI-induced natriuresis is a result of decreased reabsorption of sodium, both in the

proximal and distal segments of the nephron, rather than of alterations in the filtered sodium load (Epstein, Kasikas, and Duncan, 1973; Epstein et al., 1975a; Vesely et al.,

1995). Some possible mechanisms of WI-induced natriuresis are shown in Fig. 1.

Additionally, a recently discovered kaliuretic peptide (Vesely et al., 1995)---a 98-

amino-acid fragment of an ANP prohormone WI-enhanced kaliuresis.

released by WI-----may participate

in the

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-4-

·˘
Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
In addition to natriuresis and kaliuresis, WI induces a significant increase of calcium excretion by the kidneys (Coruzzi et al., 1993a), as well as of magnesium and bicarbonates (Behn et aL, 1969; Lin and Hong, 1984; Brown et al., 1983). Phosphate and uric acid excretion by the kidneys are decreased during the first hour of WI, but increase subsequently (Brown et al., 1983; Epstein et al., 1976).
There are other important factors which may participate in the natriuretic response to WI. Coruzzi et al. (1989) found that the correlation between the natriuretic response and urodilatin was higher than that between the natriuretic response and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP).

Endocrine Changes

Renin-angiotensin

aldosterone (RAA) system

It is generally agreed that WI induces a suppressive effect on the renin-

angiotensin-aldosterone

system (Coruzzi et al., 1985a; Epstein et al., 1975a; Kokot et

aI., 1989c; Kokot, Ulman, and Cekafiski, 1983). There was a decline in plasma renin

activity after 30 min of WI, and then a further decrease to 40% - 50% of the basal value

after 1-2 hr of WI; after WI the activity level quickly returned to normal (Greenleaf,

1984; Epstein et aL, 1975b; and Epstein and Saruta, 1971.

Epstein et al. (1975b) studied the influence of WI on plasma aldosterone in a group of normal subjects during dietary sodium restriction; they found significant suppression of aldosterone beginning after 60 min, with a peak suppression of 34% of the control value after 210 min of WI. After discontinuation of WI there was a prompt return of the aldosteronemia to prestudy levels. The mechanism of WI-induced suppression of RAA is not clear. Perhaps following the central hypervolemia, the right atrial volume receptors are stimulated, with subsequent decreases in renal sympathetic nerve activity and renin secretion, and an increase in ANP secretion (Epstein et al., 1975b; Gauer, 1978).

Increased delivery of sodium to the distal tubule (macula densa) may also participate in the pathogenesis of the suppression of renin secretion (Rabelink et al., 1989). The attenuation of WI-induced aldosteronemia parallels changes in plasma renin activity (Epstein and Saruta, 1971).

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-5-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
A trial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and arginine vasopressin (A V1a)
An increase in plasma ANP release may also play an important role in the pathogenesis of decreased renin secretion (Stasch et al., 1988). Immersion in thermoneutral water induces a significant decrease of plasma AVP concentration in healthy subjects; this effect may be observed after the first 30-60 min of immersion (Greenleaf, Shvartz, and Keil, 1981; Epstein, Preston, and Weitzman, 1981). The effect of WI on AVP secretion depends on the level of body hydration: the decrease in plasma AVP in dehydrated subjects (Greenleaf et al., 1983) is usually much greater than that in norrnovolemic subjects, but other investigators found no significant influence of WI on AVP or, on the contrary, even found an increase of vasopressin during WI (Greenleaf et al., 1983). The reason for such discrepancies may be the different hydration states of the subjects. The mechanism of the significant suppression of plasma AVP concentration is complex and not completely clear (Norsk and Epstein, 1988).
Atrial peptides are also involved in the regulation ofnatriuresis and plasma volume during WI (Epstein, 1976; Gauer, Henry, and Behn, 1970). Activation of stretch receptors located mainly in the right atrium is followed by an increased secretion of ANP (Epstein et al., 1975b; Gauer, 1978). During WI, central volemia increases and atrial filling is increased with subsequent stimulation of atrial receptors (Greenleaf et al., 1983; Greenleaf, 1984). This stimulation explains the increment of ANP during W'I. Epstein et al. (1986a) showed that 3 hr of Wl was followed by a two- to fourfold increase in plasma ANP. After completion of WI, plasma ANP declines rapidly and reaches preimmersion levels within 60 min (Epstein et al., 1986a).
Similar to its effect on AVP concentration, the hydration state of the subject may determine the magnitude of ANP secretion (Pendergast et aL, 1987); this is because an attenuated response of ANP secretion during WI was found in dehydrated subjects (Claybaugh et aL, 1986).
This response can also explain differences concerning WI-induced ANP secretion. For example, Kurosawa et al. (1988) reported that ANP did not increase significantly during WI; but the subjects underwent fluid restriction before WI and did not receive fluids during immersion.
The increase of ANP secretion is responsible for the increased natriuresis induced by WI. However, central blood volume expansion also induces many other hemodynamic, neural, and hormonal responses that might potentiate the renal response to this peptide. As a result, infusion of exogenous ANP at blood-level concentrations in subjects in air similar to those observed during WI induces a less pronounced natriuresis (60% of baseline values), in comparison with that induced in subjects in WI (130% of baseline values) (Anderson et al., 1987). Infusion of natriuretic doses of exogenous ANP into subjects in air is followed by simultaneous decreases of plasma volume and pulmonary wedge pressure (Cody et al., 1986; Henrich et al., 1986). Quite opposite physiologic effects occur during W'I (Levinson, Epstein, and Sackner, 1977; Norsk and

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-6-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
.T
Epstein, 1988; Begin et al., 1976). It would seem that the use of specific antagonists of ANP during WI may elucidate precisely the role of ANP for WI-induced natriuresis.

In parallel with the WI-induced increase of plasma ANP levels, there is an increase of urinary cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP) (Myers et al., 1988). This increase is consistent with the renal action of ANP, which may substantially contribute to the observed renal responses to WI (Myers et al., 1988; Huang, Ives, and Cogan, 1986). Urodilatin, a member of the natriuretic peptide family, is produced selectively by the kidneys. Nakamitsu et al. (1994) have found that urinary urodilatin is increased in parallel with ANP and c-GMP; they reported a higher correlation of the WI-induced natriuretic response with urodilatin than with ANP.

Drummer et al. (1991) found a dissociation between plasma ANP concentration

and urinary sodium excretion during WI; they proposed that urodilatin may be the

dominant regulator of natriuresis in subjects with increased central volemia induced by

acute saline infusion. Water-immersion-induced

increase of plasma ANP is also

markedly reduced during the blockade ofopioid receptors by naloxone (Widera, Kokot,

and Wicek, 1992).

The role of other natriuretic factors, for example., (CNP), brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), and ouabain-like diuresis induced by WI, remains to be proven.

C-type natriuretic peptide factor, in the natriuresis and

Catecholamines

Results concerning the influence of WI on plasma catecholamines are conflicting. Some data indicate that WI induced significant increases in plasma adrenaline and noradrenaline (Graveline et al., 1961), whereas others found significantly decreased plasma catecholamine levels (O'Hare, Dalton, and Roland, 1986; Davydova, Tigranyan, and Shulzhenko, 1981). Additionally, plasma dopamine was increased (Davydova, Tigranyan, and Shulzhenko, 1981) or did not change (O'Hare, Dalton, and Roland, 1986) during WI. These conflicting results seem to be mainly a result of differences in the hydration status and body position of the subjects, water temperature, and the coexistence of different stress factors during WI.

A high correlation between urinary dopamine and natriuresis induced by WI was

also found (Coruzzi et al., 1989). Theoretically, and from experimental data, it follows that increased central blood volume is followed by a significant decrease in plasma and

urinary catecholamines (DiBona, 1978; Karim et al., 1972). Plasma noradrenaline

concentration decreased progressively during 4 hr of saline infusion in air (Epstein, Johnson, and Denunzio, 1983). Both immersion and saline infusion caused an increase in

the plasma/urinary dopamine ratio (Coruzzi et al., 1989). A significant positive

correlation was also found between the mean dopamine/noradrenaline

ratio and mean

urinary sodium excretion during WI, as well as during saline infusion (Krishna, Danovitch, and Sowers, 1983). These findings suggest that neurohormonal mechanisms

are contributing to the natriuretic response to central hypervolemia. These mechanisms

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-7-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

comprise a persistent sympathoadrenal suppression and a later (after at least 2 hr of WI) increase in dopamine activity (Grossman et al., 1992).

The natriuresis induced by WI is blunted by pretreatment with dopaminergic blockers (Coruzzi et aI., 1989), which strongly indicates involvement of the dopaminergic system in the natriuretic response to WI.

Endogenous opioid peptides

Coruzzi et al. (1988b) reported that 2 hr of WI induce a significant increase in plasma methenkephalin and a significant suppression of plasma 13-endorphin concentrations. As was shown by Widera, Kokot, and Wicek (1992), an increased secretion of opioids may be involved in the hormonal response to WI.
A CTH - cortisol axis

In most of the few studies concerning the ACTH-cortisol axis, WI had a suppressive effect in healthy individuals, as well as in patients with various pathological conditions (Grzeszczak, Kokot, and Wicek, 1986; Ogihara et al., 1986). However, Epstein (1976) found no significant changes in plasma cortisol during WI in healthy subjects. Activation of low-pressure receptors located in the chest may suppress the ACTH-cortisol axis during WI (Mancia, Donald, and Sheperd, 1979). The improvement in renal excretory function inducedby WI may contribute to the reduction in plasma cortisol that is produced by WI (Guyton et al., 1984).

Prostaglandins (PG)

The significant increase of urinary PGE excretion during WI (observed after 2 hr

of WI) also occurred after pretreatment with PG synthesis inhibitors such as

indomethacin (Epstein et al., 1979). Although administration of indomethacin attenuates

the augmentation of PG synthesis during WI, it does not impair the natriuresis. The

physiological relationship between the renin-angiotensin

system and synthesis of renal

PG is dissociated during WI (Epstein, Lifschitz, and Haber, 1980). Epstein, Norsk, and

Loutzenhiser (1989) have suggested that WI-induced central volume expansion is the

main factor influencing renal PG excretion. Preliminary observations suggest that PGI2

might contribute to the natriuretic and diuretic response induced by WI (Rabelink,

Koomans, and Dorhout-Mees, 1991).

Erythropoietin

Two hours of WI increases plasma erythropoietin levels both in healthy subjects

and in patients with essential hypertension (Chudek, Wicek, and Kokot, 1997);

participation of the renin-angiotensin

system and ANP in the WI-induced increase in

erythropoietin secretion seems to be unlikely in both normotensives and hypertensives.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-8-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Prolactin

Fiore et al. (1987) found no significant changes in prolactinemia hypervolemia induced by WI.

during

Other hormones

Secretion of endothelins catecholamines, both in healthy (Gulberg and Gerbes, 1995).

1 to 3 increases during WI in parallel with subjects and in patients with complicated liver cirrhosis

A kaliuretic peptide which is a potent stimulator of both potassium and water excretion by the kidneys was discovered recently (Vesely et al,, 1995); WI increases release of this kaliuretic peptide, especially in patients with liver cirrhosis (Vesely et al., 1996).

Kallikrein-kinin system

WI significantly suppresses the kallikrein-kinin system (O'Hare et al., 1986).

PERSPECTIVES IMMERSION

ON THE CLINICAL APPLICATION

OF WATER

Edemata of Different Origins
Physiological responses to water immersion are characterized mainly by increased diuresis and natriuresis. Therefore it seems reasonable to use WI as an important therapeutic maneuver in patients with edema of different etiologies; for example, in the treatment of overhydration in patients with liver cirrhosis, preeclampsia, nephrotic syndrome, and idiopathic edema. These and others are discussed below.

Liver Cirrhosis

Immersion has been used both as an investigative tool in the study of water-

electrolyte abnormalities in liver cirrhosis, and as a therapeutic procedure in edematous

patients (Epstein, Larios, and Johnson, 1985; Gerbes et al., 1993; Bichet, Groves, and

Shier, 1983). Hemodynamic monitoring (Swan-Ganz catheter) has been used throughout

WI to determine changes in cardiac output, right-atrial and pulmonary-wedge

pressures,

and systemic vascular resistance (Bichet, Groves, and Schier, 1983).

It is important to emphasize that cirrhotic patients with liver cirrhosis exhibit heterogeneous responses to natremia and AVP secretion (Epstein et aL, 1984). In spite of these differences, WI can be used as a adjuvant method for treatment of edema in liver

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-9-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
cirrhosis in addition to diuretic therapy. Additional use of spironolactone (aldactone) may augment the natriuretic and diuretic effect of WI (Gerbes et al., 1993). Despite a considerable increase in effective blood volume in patients with liver cirrhosis, WI does not restore the impaired renal function in these patients.

Nephrotic Syndrome

Berlyne et al. (1981) first demonstrated the possibility of using WI to examine renal sodium and water handling in patients with the nephrotic syndrome. Immersion

induced a marked natriuresis and diuresis and led to significant weight loss. A

concomitant decrease of plasma aldosterone was also found in these patients (Kokot,

1989c; O'Hare et al., 1988). The pathophysiological

role of ANP in renal sodium

handling during WI in nephrotic patients has been assessed (Peterson et al., 1988). These

patients are characterized by a reduced natriuretic and diuretic response to WI, in

comparison with healthy controls, in spite of a markedly greater increment in plasma ANP levels (Peterson et al., 1988). These results suggest a reduced sensitivity of the

collecting tubules to the natriuretic action of ANP in nephrotic patients, which may contribute to the development of their edema. In light of these results it seems that WI

may serve as an additional therapeutic maneuver in nephrotic patients.

Preeclampsia

Pregnancy is characterized by an increase in circulating plasma volume; this

increase is less pronounced in women with preeclampsia. When immersion-induced endocrine alterations were examined in healthy pregnant women and in women with mild

to moderate late pregnancy preeclampsia, it was shown that WI induced a prompt fall of

mean arterial blood pressure which was accompanied by decreases of plasma renin

activity and plasma aldos.terone (Ulman-Doniec et aI., 1987). In contrast to nonpregnant women, healthy pregnant women and women with preeclampsia showed a significantly attenuated WI-induced increase in plasma ANP levels. Despite these differences in the

hormonal reaction patterns, the WI-induced diuresis was similar in all groups. These

results suggest that factors other than ANP may be involved in WI-induced diuresis.

enhanced

Arterial Hypertension

Water immersion induces a significantly greater decline in the blood pressure of

patients with essential hypertension than does bed rest (Henry, 1995). Regardless of the

etiology of the hypertension (essential, renal, or renovascular), WI induces a significant

decrease in plasma renin activity and AVP concentration, but a significant increase in

ANP which was quantitatively different from that in normotensive subjects (Larochelle

et al., 1994; Epstein, Loutzenhiser, and Levinson, 1986b). Immersion-induced

endocrine

alterations are not related to either the severity of or the etiology of hypertension (Coruzzi

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-10-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

et al., 1985a; Epstein, Loutzerthiser, and Levinson, 1986b). Immersion-induced

reduction

in blood pressure was not related to the above-mentioned

endocrine alterations (Coruzzi

et al., 1985a). Therefore, it seems that factors other than decreases in plasma renin

activity and aldosterone and AVP concentrations are mediating the WI-induced

hypotension (Kokot et al., 1989e). Findings from WI studies performed in hypertensive

patients after naloxone administration suggest that opioid receptors play an important role

in the regulation of ANP secretion both in normotensive subjects and in patients with

essential hypertension (Widera, Kokot, and Wicek, 1992). As mentioned previously,

Coruzzi et al. (1989) suggested that the dopaminergic system is a major determinant of

the exaggerated WI-induced natriuresis in patients with essential hypertension. It should

be stressed that WI also induces marked supression of peripheral plasma renin activity

and mean arterial pressure in patients with renovascular hypertension (Coruzzi et al.,

1985a).

Calcium antagonists 1993b).

given prior to WI may increase natriuresis

(Coruzzi et al.,

Acute and Chronic Renal Failure

Patients with acute renal failure at the oliguric/anuric phase are characterized by markedly elevated ANP levels and a normal physiological regulatory mechanism for ANP secretion, although by a reduced response of ANP release triggered by central volume expansion (Kokot, Grzeszczak, and Wicek, 1989, Kokot et al., 1990). Patients with chronic and acute renal failure are also characterized during WI by a similar but quantitatively different response in plasma renin activity, aldosterone, and AVP secretion when compared with normal subjects (Kokot et al., 1989c).

Patients with acute or chronic renal failure show a greater volume during WI than do healthy subjects (Kokot et al., 1989c), result of the impaired excretory function of the kidneys.

increase in plasma which seems to be a

Kidney Transplant Patients

In spite of lack of renal innervation, patients with a transplanted kidney show

significant declines in plasma renin activity and in plasma aldosterone level and a

natriuretic response to WI that is similar to that of healthy subjects (Kokot et al., 1989b),

indicating that intact renal nerves are not mandatory for a normal renal response to WI in

humans (Rabelink et al., 1993). We have found that patients with kidney transplants are

characterized by a reduced response of ANP secretion to central hypervolemia (Kokot et al.,

1989b); moreover, the kind ofimmunosupressive

therapy that is used seems to play a minor

role in the response ofrenin, AVP, and ANP secretion to WI.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-1 1-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
Heart Transplant Patients
Immersion can be an important investigative tool in cardiac transplant recipients. Myers et al. (1988) and Kokot et al. (1989d) found that these transplant recipients are characterized by a normal response of ANP secretion to WI-induced hypervolemia, and they show WI-induced natriuresis and diuresis that are similar to those of healthy subjects. Immersion can be also used to elucidate the role of cardiac denervation in volume homeostasis.

Endocrine Disorders

Diabetes mellitus

Conflicting results have been obtained from WI studies of volume regulation in diabetic patients. Liebermann et al. (1991) and O'Hare, Anderson, and Millar (1989) found that ANP levels were higher in diabetics than in controls, and that during WI there was exaggerated ANP secretion. In spite of elevated ANP levels, diabetic patients show a reduced natriuretic response to WI (O'Hare et al., 1988; Liebermann et al., 1991; O'Hare, Anderson, and Millar, 1989) suggesting kidney resistance to ANP. Following WI, 18 diabetic patients had significantly lower ANP secretion than normals (Kokot et al., 1989a). Given the WI reduction in ANP secretion in diabetic patients, WI-induced diuresis was comparable to that in healthy subjects (Liebermann et al., 1991). These results suggest that factors other than ANP are operative in the mechanism of WI-induced natriuresis and diuresis in diabetic patients.

Primary aldosteronism

The saline infusion test is widely used for differential diagnosis of patients with

primary aldosteronism and in other hypertensive patients without excess

mineralocorticoid

(Weiberger, Grim, and Hollifield, 1979). Coruzzi et al. (1991) used WI

to differentiate aldosterone-producing

adenomas from idiopathic hyperaldosteronism;

they concluded that WI is a suitable method for differentiating these two forms of

primary aldosteronism.

In contrast to its use in differential diagnosis of primary aldosteronism,

no value in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma

(Coruzzi et al., 1992).

WI was of

CONCLUSIONS

AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

In the last two decades there has been increasing interest in the adaptive physiological responses to the water immersion. This interest stems from the use of immersion to simulate the spaceflight environment for the purpose of studying physiological responses to that environment, as well as for studying volume and water-

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-12-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine
electrolyte abnormalities over a wide range of human pathological settings. As a result, WI is now recognized not only as a diagnostic tool, but also as a treatment for decompensated liver cirrhosis (Epstein, Larios, and Johnson, 1985; Epstein et aL, 1984), nephrotic syndrome (Peterson et aL, 1988; Berlyne et aL, 1981), preeclampsia (Kokot, Lilman, and Cekafiski, 1983; Ulman-Doniec eta/., 1987), and some forms of arterial hypertension (Coruzzi et al., 1985b; Epstein, Loutzenhiser, and Levinson, 1986b; Coruzzi, et al., 1991). It can be expected that applications of the water-immersion technique will gain further scientific, diagnostic, and therapeutic relevance.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-13-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

REFERENCES

Aborelius, M., Balldin, U. I., and Lilja, B. Haemodynamic changes in man during immersion with the head above water. Aerospace Med. 43: 592-598, 1972.
Anderson, J. V., Donckier, J., Payne, N. N., Beacham, J., Slater, J. D. H., and Bloom, S. R. Atrial natriuretic peptide: evidence of action as a natriuretic hormone at physiological plasma concentrations in man. Clin. Sci. 72: 305-312, 1987.

Bazett, H. C., Thurlow, S., Crowell, C., and Stewert, W. Studies on the effects of baths on man: the diuresis caused by warm bath, together with some observations on urinary tides. Am. J. Physiol. 70: 430-452, 1924.

Begin, R., Epstein, M., Sackner, M. A., Levinson, R., Dougherty, R., and Duncan, D. Effects of water immersion to the neck in pulmonary circulation and tissue volume
in man. JAppl Physiol. 40: 293-299, 1976.

Behn, C., Gauer, O. H., Kirsch, K., and Eckert, P. Effects of sustained intrathoracic vascular distension on body fluid distrubution and renal excretion in man. Pfluegers Archiv. 313: 123-136, 1969.

Berlyne, G. M., Sutton, J., Brown, C., Feinroth, M. V., Feinroth, M., Adler, A. J., and Friedman, E. A. Renal salt and water handling in water immersion in the nephrotic syndrome. Clin. Sci. 61:605-610, 1981.

Bichet, D. G., Groves, B. M., and Schrier, and sodium excretion by immersion Int. 24: 788-794, 1983.

R. W. Mechanisms in decompensated

of improvement cirrhotic patients.

of water Kidney

Boehm, G., and Ekert, F. Appreciable x-ray evidence of the influence of daily or therapeutic baths on the central circulatory organs in healthy subjects. Dtsch. Klin. Med. 182: 598-610, 1938.

Arch.

Brown, C., Sutton, J. V., Adler, A., Feinroth, M. V., Feinroth, Berlyne, G. M. Renal calcium and magnesium handling nephrotic patients. Nephron 33: 17-20, 1983.

M., Friedman, E. A., and in water immersion in

Cargill, W. H., Sellers, S., and Shure, M. Induced variations in glomerular filtration rate and the urinary excretion of water arid chloride. Am. J. Med. 11: 239-240, 1951.

Chudek, J., Wicek, A., and Kokot, F. Influence of water immersion on plasma erythropoietin concentration in patients with essential hypertension. Kidney Press. Res. 20: 406-410, 1997.

Blood

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-14-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Claybaugh, J. R., Pendergast, D. R., Davis, J. E., Akiba, C., Pazik, M., and Hong, S. K. Fluid conservation in athletes: responses to water intake, supine posture, and immersion. ,/. Appl. Physiol. 61: 7-15, 1986.

Cody, R. J., Atlas, S. A., Laragh, J. H., Kubo, S. H., Covit, A. B., Ryman, K. S.,

Saknovich, A., Pondolfino, K., Clark, M., Camargo, M. J. F., Scarborough, R. M.,

and Lewicki, ./. A. Atria/natriuretic

factor in normal subjects and heart failure

patients. J. Clin. Invest. 78: 1362-1374, 1986.

Coruzzi, P., Biggi, A., Musiari, L., Coriati, R., Mossini, G. L., Gueri, A., and Novarini,

A. Calcium and sodium handling during volume expansion in essential

hypertension. Metabolism 42:1331-1335,

1993 a.

Coruzzi, P., Biggi, A., Musiari, L., Ravanetti, C., and Novarini, A. Renin-aldosterone system suppresssion during water immersion in renovascular hypertension. Clin. Sci. 68: 609-612, 1985a.

Coruzzi, P., Biggi, A., Musiari, L., Ravanetti, and natriuresis during water immersion 638-642, 1986.

C., and Novarini, A. Renal hemodynamics in normal humans. Pfluegers Arch. 407:

Coruzzi, P., Musiari, L., Biggi, A., Carra, N., Panzali, A. F., and Novarini A. A new diagnostic test for primary aldosteronism. Am. J Hypertens. 4: 694-699, 199 I.

Coruzzi, P., Musiari, L., Biggi, A., Mossini, G. L., and Novarini,

system unresponsiveness 1992.

in pheochromocytoma.

Jr. Human

A. Renin-angiotensin Hypertens. 6: 239-241,

Coruzzi, P., Musiari, L., Biggi, A., Ravanetti, C., VaUisa, D., Montanari, A., and Novarini, A. Role of renal hemodynamics in the exaggerated natriuresis of essential hypertension. Kidney Int. 33: 875-880, 1988a.

Coruzzi, P., Musiari, L., Mossini, G. L., and Novarini, A. Regulation of sodium excretion in human hypertension: long-term effects of calcium antagonist and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 21: 920-925, 1993b.

Coruzzi, P. A., Novarini, A., Biggi, A., Lazzeroni, E., Musiari, L., Ravanetti, C., Tagliavini, S., and Borghetti, A. Low pressure receptor activity and exaggerated natriuresis in essential hypertension. Nephron 40:309-315, 1985b.

Coruzzi, P., Novarini, A., Musiari, L., Ravanetti, C., Ghielmi, Montanari, A. The antinatriuretic effect of dopaminergic expansion is independent of circulating atrial natriuretic 479-484, 1989.

S., RodeIla, A., and blockade during volume factor. Clin. Sci. 77:

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-15-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Coruzzi, P., Novarini, A., Musiari, L., Rossi, E., and Borghetti, A. Effects of central

hypervolemia by water immersion on renin-aldosterone

system and ACTH-cortisol

axis in hemodialyzed patients. Nephron 36: 238-241, 1984.

Coruzzi, P., Ravanetti, C., Musiafi, L., Biggi, A., Vascovi, P. P., and Novarini, A. Circulating opioid peptides during water immersion in normal man. Clin. Sci. 74: 133-136, 1988b.

Davydova, A. A., Tigranyan, R. A., and Shulzhenko, E. B. The sympatho-adrenal in man in water immersion. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 15: 30-34, 1981.

system

DiBona, G. F. Neural control of renal tubular sodium reabsorption 37: 1214-1217, 1978.

in the dog. Fed. Proc.

Drummer, C., Fiedler, F., Konig, A., and Gerzer, R. Urodilatin, a kidney-derived natriuretic factor, is excreted with a circadian rhythm and is stimulated by saline infusion in man. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 1:1109-1113, 1991.

Dutawa, J., Kokot, F., and Grzeszczak, W. Einfluss der Wasserimmersion

auf die

Plasmareninaktivitat,

den Vasopressin-, und Aldosteronspiegel

bei Diabetikern. Z.

Ges. Inn. Med. 42: 298-302, 1987.

Echt, M., Lange, L., and Gauer, O. H. Changes of peripheral venous tone and central transmural venous pressure during water immersion in a thermo-neutral bath.

Pfluegers Arch. 352:211-217,

1974.

Epstein, M. Cardiovascular and renal effects of water immersion in man: application of the model in the assessment of volume homeostasis. Circ. Res. 39: 619-628, 1976.

Epstein, M. Renal effects of head-out water immersion in man: implications for an understanding of volume homeostasis. Physiol. Rev. 58:529-581, 1978.
Epstein, M. Renal effects of head-out water immersion in humans: a 15-year update. Physiol. Rev. 72: 563-621, 1992.
Epstein, M., Johnson, G., and Denunzio, A. G. Effects of water immersion on plasma catecholamines in normal humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 54: 244-248, 1983.

Epstein, M., Katsikas, J. L., and Duncan, D. C. Role of mineralocorticoids

in the

natriuresis of water immersion in normal man. Circ. Res. 32: 228-236, 1973.

Epstein, M., Larios, O., and Johnson, G. Effects of water immersion catecholamines in decompensated cirrhosis. Miner Electrolyte 1985.

on plasma Metab. 11: 25-34,

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-16-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Epstein, M., Lifschitz, R., and Haber, E. Dissociation ofrenin-aldosterone prostaglandin E during volume expansion induced by immersion Clin. Sci. 59: 55-62, 1980.

and renal in normal man.

Epstein, M., Lifschitz, M., Hoffman, D. S., and Stein, J. H. Relationship prostaglandin E and renal sodium handling during water immersion Circ. Res. 45: 71-80, 1979.

between renal in normal man.

Epstein, M., Loutzenhiser, R. D., Friedland, E., Aceto, R. M., Camargo, R. J. F., and Atlas, S. A. Increases in circulating atrial natriuretic factor during immersioninduced central hypervolemia in normal humans. ,L. Hypertens. 4 (Suppl. 2): $93$99, 1986a.

Epstein, M., Loutzenhiser, R., and Levinson, R. Spectrum of deranged sodium homeostasis in essential hypertension. Hypertension 8: 422-432, 1986b.

Epstein, M., Norsk, P., and Loutzenhiser, R. Effects of water immersion on atrial natriuretic release in humans. Am. J. Nephrol. 9: 1-9, 1989.

Epstein, M. Pins, D. S., Arrington, R., Denunzio, A. G., and Engstrom, R. Comparison of water immersion and saline infusion as means of inducing volume expansion in
man. J. Appl. Physiol. 39: 66-70, 1975a.

Epstein, M., Pins, D. S., Sandro, J., and Haber, E. Suppression of plasma renin and plasma aldosterone during water immersion in normal man. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 41: 618-625, 1975b.

Epstein, M., Pins, D. S., Silvers, W., Loutzenhiser, R., Canterboury, J. M., and Reiss, E. Failure of water immersion to influence parathyroid hormone secretion and renal phosphate handling in normal man. Ł Lab. Clin. Med. 87: 218-226, 1976.
Epstein, M., Preston, S., and Weitzman, R. E. Isoosmotic central blood volume expansion suppresses plasma arginine vasopressin in normal man. ,I. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 52: 256-262, 1981.

Epstein, M., and Saruta, T. Effect of water immersion on renin aldosterone and renal sodium handling in normal man. J. Appl. PhysioL 31: 368-374, 1971.

Epstein, M., Weitzman, R. E., Preston, S.,'and Denunzio, A. G. Relationship plasma arginine vasopressin and renal water handling in decompensated Miner. Electrolyte Metab. 10: 155-165, 1984.

between cirrhosis.

Fiore, C. E., Foti, G., Benenati, R., Malatino, L. S., Grimaldi, D. R., and Guzzardi, F. Modification of PRA, aldosterone, prolactin, and parathyroid hormone serum levels by "head-out" water immersion. Riv. Eur. Sci. Med. Farmacol. 9:147-151, 1987.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-17-

Water Immersion Deconditioning

in Medicine

Gauer, O. H. Mechanoreceptors

in the intrathoracic circulation and plasma volume

control. In The Kidney in Liver Disease, edited by M. Epstein, Elsevier: New York,

1978, pp. 13-17.

Gauer, O. H., Henry, J. P., and Behn, C. The regulation of extracellular Annu. Rev. Physiol. 32: 547-595, 1970.

fluid volume.

Gerbes, A. L., Pilz, A., Wemze, H., and Jungst, D. Renal sodium handling and neurohumoral systems in patients with cirrhosis in sitting posture: effects of spironolactone and water immersion. Clin. Invest. 71: 894-897, 1993.

Graveline, D. E., Balke, B., McKenzie, R. E., and Hartman, B. Psychobiologic effects of water immersion induced hypodynamics. Aerospace Med. 32: 387-397, 1961.

Graveline, D. E., and McCally, M. Body fluid distrubution: Aerospace Med. 33: 1281-1290, 1962.

implications

for zero gravity.

Graybiel, A., and Clark, B. Symptoms resulting from prolonged immersion in water: the problem of zero G asthenia. Aerospace Med. 32:181-196, 1961.

Greenleaf, J. E. Physiological responses to prolonged bed rest and fluid immersion in man..1. Appl. Physiol. 57: 619-635, 1984.

Greenleaf, J. E., Morse, J. T., Barnes, P. R., Silver, J., and Keil, L. C. Hypervolemia and plasma vasopressin response during water immersion in men. J. Appl. Physiol. 55: 1688-1693, 1983.

Greenleaf, J. E., Shvartz, E., and Keil, L. C. Hemodilution, vasopressin suppression, and diuresis during water immersion in man. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 52: 329-336, 1981.

Greenleaf, J. E., Shvartz, E., Kravik, S., and Keil, L. C. Fluid shifts and endocrine responses during chair and water immersion in man. J. Appl. Physiol. 48: 79-88, 1980.

Grossman, E., Goldstein, D. S., Hoffman, A., Wacks, I. R., and Epstein, M. Effects of

water immersion on sympathoadrenal

and dopa-dopamine

systems in humans. Am.

J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 262: R993-R999, 1992.

Grzeszczak, W., Kokot, F., and Wicek, A. Effect of water immersion on serum ACTH and cortisol concentration in patients with acute renal failure and in healthy subjects. Acta Med. Pol. 27:109-116, 1986.

Gulberg, V., and Gerbes, A. L. Relation of endothelins to volume regulating neurohumoral systems in patients with cirrhosis of the liver. Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 25: 893-898, 1995.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

- 18-

Water Immersion Deconditioning

in Medicine

Guyton, A. C., Manning, R. D., Hale, J. E., Norman, E. A., Young, D. B., and Pan, Y. L. The pathogenic role of the kidney. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 6: S 151-S 161, 1984.

Harrison, M. H., Keil, L. C., Wade, C. A., Silver, J. E,, Geelen, G., and Greenleaf, J. E. Effect of hydration on plasma volume and endocrine responses to water immersion. J. Appl. Physiol. 61: 1410-1417, 1986.

Hartshorne, H. Water versus Hydrotherapy or an Assay on Water and Its True Relations to Medicine. L. Loyd and P. Smith Press: Philadelphia, PA, 1847, 28 pp.

Henrich, W. L., Walker, B. R., Handelman, W. A., Erickson, A. L., Arnold, Schrier, R. W. Effects of angiotensin II on plasma natriuretic hormone water excretion. Kidney Int. 30: 503-508, 1986.

P. E., and and renal

Henry, J. P. Historical perspective Physiol. 22: 43-48, 1995.

of cardiorenal

integration.

Clin. Exp. Pharmacol.

Hinghofer-Szalkay,

H., Harrison, M. H., and Greenleaf, J. E. Early fluid and protein

shit, s in men during water immersion. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 56: 673-678, 1987.

Howard, P., Emsting, J., Denison, D. M., Fryer, D. I., Glaister, D. H., and Byford, G. H. Effects of simulated weightlessness upon the cardiovascular system. Aerospace Med. 38: 551-563, 1967.

Huang, C. L., Ives, H. E., and Cogan, M. G. In vivo evidence that cGMP is the second messenger for atrial natriuretic factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83: 8015-1018, 1986.

Ish-Shalom, N., and Better, O. S. Volume regulation in man during neck-out immersion in a medium with high specific gravity (Dead Sea water). Israel J. Med. Sci. 20: 109-112, 1984.

Karim, F., Kidd, C., Malpus, C. M., and Penna, P. E. The effects of stimulation atrial receptors on sympathetic efferent nerve activity. 3".Physiol. (Lond.) 243-260, 1972.

of the left 227:

Khosla, S. S., and DuBois, A. B. Osmoregulation and interstitial fluid pressure changes in humans during water immersion. J. AppI. Physiol. 51: 686-692, 1981.

Koepke, J. P., and DiBona, G. F. Blunted chronic sodium retaining disorders. 1987.

natriuresis to atrial natriuretic Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol.

peptide in 252: F865-F871,

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-19-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Kokot, F., Dutawa, J., Bar, A., Klin, M., Grzeszczak, W., and Darocha,

immersion-induced

alterations of atrial natriuretic peptide, plasma

aldosterone and vasopressin in diabetic patients. Contrib. Nephrol.

1989a.

Z. Waterrenin activity, 73:102- I 10,

Kokot, F., Grzeszczak, W., and Wicek, A. Water-immersion-induced

alterations of atrial

natriuretic peptide in patients with non-inflammatory

acute renal failure. Nephrol.

Dial, Transplant. 4: 691-695, 1989.

Kokot, F., Grzeszczak, W., Wicek, A., Zukowska-Szczechowska,

E., Ku_mierski, S., and

Szkodny, A. Water-immersion-induced

alterations of plasma atrial natriuretic

peptide, plasma renin activity, plasma aldosterone, and vasopressin in kidney

transplant recipients. Transplant Proc. 21:2052-2055,

1989b.

Kokot, F., Grzeszczak, W., Zukowska-Szczechowska,

E., and Wicek A. Water-

immersion-induced

alterations of plasma atrial natriuretic peptide and its

relationship to the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone

system and vasopressin secretion

in acute and chronic renal failure. Clin. Nephrol. 31: 247-252, 1989c.

Kokot, F., Grzeszczak, W., Zukowska-Szczechowska,

E., and Wicek, A. Water-

immersion-induced

alterations of plasma vasopressin levels and activity of the

renin-angiotensin-aldoster0ne

system in noninflammatory acute renal failure and

end-stage renal failure. Int. Urol. Nephrol. 22: 285-293, 1990.

Kokot, F., Religa, Z., Pasyk, S., Wicek, A., Frycz, J., Grzeszczak, W., Bochenek, A., and Dutawa, J. Atrial natriuretic peptide secretion in heart transplant patients. Int. J. Artif. Organs 12: 321-326, 1989d.
Kokot, F., Ulman, J., and Cekafiski, A. Influence of head-out water immersion on plasma renin activity, aldosterone, vasopressin, and blood pressure in late pregnancy toxaemia. Proc. Eur. Dial Transpl. Assoc. 20: 557-561, 1983.

Kokot, F., Wicek, A., Grzeszczak, W., Szczechowska, E., and Dulawa, J. The water immersion model in nephrology. Contrib. Nephrol. 70:107-115, 1989e.

Krishna, G. G., Danovitch, G. M., and Sowers, J. R. Catecholamine responses to central volume expansion produced by head-out water immersion and saline infusion. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 56: 998-1002, 1983.

Krizek, V. History ofbalneotherapy. 1963, pp. 131-159.

In Medical Hydrology, edited by S.Licht, Waverly,

Kurosawa, T., Sakamoto, H., Katoh, Y., and Marumo, F. Atrial natriuretic a minor diuretic factor in dehydrated subjects immersed to the neck Appl. Physiol. 57: 10-14, 1988.

peptide in water.

is only Eur. J.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-20-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Lange, L., Lange, S., Echt, M., and Gauer, O. H. Heart volume in relation to body posture and immersion in a thermo-neutral bath. Pfluegers Arch. 352: 219-226, 1974.

Larochelle, P., Cusson, J. R., Du Souich, P., Hamet, P., and Schiffrin, E. L. Renal effects of immersion in essential hypertension. Am. J. Hypertens. 7:120-128, 1994.

Leach, C. S. Fluid control mechanisms 58 (Suppl. 9): A74-A79, 1987.

in weightlessness.

Aviat. Space Environ. Med.

Leach, C. S., and Rambaut, P. C. Biochemical responses of the Skylab crewmen: an overview. In Biomedical Results From Skylab, edited by R. S. Johnston and L. F. Dietlein, Washington, DC: NASA SP-377, 1977, pp. 204-215.

Levinson, R., Epstein, M., Sackner, M. A., and Begin, M. Comparison water immersion and saline infusion on central haemodynamics Mol. Med. 52: 343-350, 1977.

of the effects of in man. Clin. Sci.

Liebermann, J. S., Parra, L., Newton, L., Scandling, Atrial natriuretic peptide response to changing nephropathy. Diabetes 40: 893-901, 1991.

J. D., Loon, N., and Myers, plasma volume in diabetic

B. D.

Lin, Y. C., and Hong, S. K. Physiology 139-147, 1984.

of water immersion.

Undersea Biomed. Res. 1:

Lundgreen, C. E. G. Respiratory Res. 1: 139-147, 1984.

function during simulated wet dives. Undersea Biomed.

Lutwak, L., Whedon, G. D., Lachance, P. A., Reid, J. M., and Lipscomb, H. S. Mineral,

electrolyte and nitrogen balance studies of the Gemini-VII fourteen-day orbital

space flight. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 29:1140-1156,

1969.

McCally, M. Plasma volume response to water immersion: Aerospace Med. 35: 130-132, 1964.

implications

for space flight.

Mancia, G., Donald, D. E., and Sheperd, J. T. Inhibition of adrenergic outflow to

peripheral blood vessels by vagal afferents form the cardiopulmonary

region

dog. Orc. Res. 33: 713-719, 1979.

in the

Miki, K., Hajduczok, water immersion Comp. Physiol.

G., and Hong, S. K. Extracellular fluid and plasma volumes during in nephrectomised dogs. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative
252: R972-R978, 1987.

Myers, B. D., Peterson, C., Molin, C., Tomlanovich, S. J., Newton, L. D., Nitkin, R., Sandier, H., and Murad, F. Role of cardiac atria in the human renal response to

changing plasma volume. Am. J. Physiol. RenalPhysiol.

254: F562-F573, 1988.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-21-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Nakamitsu, S., Sagawa, S., Miki, K., Wada, F., Nagaya, K., Keil, L. C., Drummer, C.,

Gerzer, R., Greenleaf, J. E., and Hong, S. K. Effect of water temperature on

diuresis-natriuresis:

AVP, ANP, and urodilatin during immersion in men. J. Appl.

Physiol. 77: 1919-1925, 1994.

Norsk, P., Bonde-Petersen, arginin vasopressin 78, 1985.

F., and Warberg, J. Central venous pressure and plasma during water immersion in man. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 54: 71-

Norsk, P., Bonde-Petersen,
kidney during graded 1986.

F., and Warberg, water immersion

J. Arginine vasopressin, circulation, and in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 61: 565-574,

Norsk, P., and Epstein, M. Effects of water immersion on arginine vasopressin humans. ,/. Appl. Physiol. 64: 1-10, 1988.

release in

Norsk, P., and Epstein, M. Manned space flight and the kidney. Am. J. Nephrol. 11 : 8197, 1991.

Ogihara, T., Shima, J., Hara, H., Tabuchi, Y., Hashizume, K., Nagano, M., Kajahira, K., Kangawa, K., Matsuo, H., and Kumahara, Y. Significant increase in plasma immunoreactive atrial natriuretic peptide concentration during head-out water immersion. Life Sci. 38: 2413-2418, 1986.

O'Hare, J. P., Anderson, J. V., and Millar, N. D. Hormonal response to blood expansion in diabetic subjects with and without autonomic nephropathy. Endocrinol. 30: 571-579, 1989.

volume Clin.

O'Hare, J. P., Anderson, J. V., Millar, N. D., Bloom, S. R., and Corrall, R. J. The

relationship of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone

system to atrial natriuretic peptide

and the natriuresis of volume expansion in diabetics with and without proteinuria.

Postgrad. Med. J.. 64: (Suppl. 3): 35-38, 1988.

O'Hare, J. P., Dalton, N., and Roland, J. M. Plasma catecholamine immersion. Horm. Metab. Res. 18: 713-716, 1986.

levels during water

O'Hare, P., Bhoola, K., Chapman, I., Roland, J., and Corrall, R. Importance of circulating and urinary tissue kallikrein in the control of acute natriuresis and diuresis evoked by water immersion in man. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 198: 225-232, 1986.
Pendergast, D. R., De Bold, A. J., Pazik, M., and Hong, S. K. Effects of head-out water immersion on plasma natriuretic factor in man. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 184: 429-436, 1987.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-22-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Peterson, C., Madsen, B., Perlman, A., Chan, A. Y. M., and Myers, B. D. Atrial natriuretic peptide and the renal response to hypervolemia in nephrotic man. Kidney lnt. 34: 825-831, 1988.

Peterson, R. V., Benjamin, B. A., and Hurst, N. L. Effect of vagotomy sympathectomy on responses of the monkey to water immersion. 63: 2476-2481, 1987.

and thoracic J Appl. Physiol.

Prefaut, C. F., DuBois, F., Russos, C., Amaral-Marques,

R., Macklern, P. T., and Ruff, F.

Influence of immersion to the neck in water on airways closure and distribution of

perfusion in man. Respir. Physiol. 37: 313-323, 1979.

Rabelink, T. J., Koomans, H. A., Boer, W. H., van Rijn, J., and Dorhout-Mees, E. J.

Lithium clearance in water-immersion-induced

natriuresis in humans. J Appl.

Physiol. 66: 1744-1748, 1989.

Rabelink, T. J., Koomans, H. A., and Dorhout-Mees, E. J. Role ofprostaglandins in the natriuresis of head-out water immersion in humans. Clin. Sci. 80: 481-488, 1991.

Rabelink, T. J., van-Tilborg, to head-out immersion 477, 1993.

K. A., Hene, R. J., and Koomans, H. A. Natriuretic response in humans with recent kidney transplants. Clin. Sci. 85: 471-

Stasch, J. P., Hirth, C., Kazda, S., and Neuser, D. The reduction of renin and aldosterone as a response to acute hypervolemia is blocked by a monoclonal antibody directly against atrial natriuretic peptides. Life Sci. 42:511-516, 1988.
Tajima, F., Ogata, H., Miki, K., Enishi, K., and Shiraki, K. Changes in limb volume during head-out water immersion in humans. J. Univ. Occup. Environ. Health 11: 145-153, 1989.

Thames, M. D. Neutral control of renal function: contribution of cardiopulmonary baroreceptors to the control of the kidney. Fed. Proc. 37: 1209-1213, 1977.

Ulman-Doniec, I., Kokot, F., Wannbach, G., and Drab, M. Water-immersion-induced endocrine alterations in women with EPH gestosis. Clin. Nephrol. 28:51-55,

1987.

Vesely, D. L., Norsk, P., Gower, Jr., W. R., Chiou, S., and Epstein, M. Release of

kaliuretic peptide during immersion-induced

central hypervolemia in healthy

humans. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 209: 20-26, 1995.

Vesely, D. L., Preston, R., Gower, Jr., W. R., Chiou, S., and Epstein, M. Increased

release of kaliuretic peptide during immersion-induced

central hypervolemia in

cirrhotic humans. Am. J. Nephrol. 16: 128-137, 1996.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-23-

Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Webb, P., and Annis, J. R. Silicone submersion--a

feasibility study. U.S. Naval Air

Development 1966.

Center, Johnsville, PA, Report No. NADC-M'R-6620,

AD 645080,

Weiberger, M. H., Grim, C. E., and Hollifield, J. W. Primary aldosteronism: localisation, and treatment. Ann. Intern. Med. 90: 386-395, 1979.

diagnosis,

Weston, C. F. M., O'Hare, J. P., Evans, changes in man during immersion 613-616, 1987.

J. M., and Corrall, R. J. M. Haemodynamic in water at different temperatures. Clin. Sci. 73:

Widera, W., Kokot, F., and Wicek, A. Do opioid receptors participate in the regulation of atrial natriuretic peptide secretion in hypertensive patients. Clin. Nephrol. 38: 209213, 1992.

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-24-

_°
Water Immersion Deconditioning in Medicine

Figure 1: Possible mechanisms of water-immersion-induced

increase of diuresis and

natriuresis (ANP: atrial natriuretic peptide; BNP: brain natriuretic peptide; CNP: C-type

natriuretic peptide; OLF: ouabain-like factor).

Wicek, Nowicki, and Kokot

-25-

t_

v

ta

°_

._..+ )_

E

· D f"l
,,-+p+.
v

.c
m
--._E 0

i

_.·+l
o )˘ J
=__

._ o."u.._"

--

_

_ ,,.

_.mmzo_..m1._,

_zz_
Z <,_0

_ _-_.
>_o ++++
)) ++,+

mm

|

if) I

_, m
iii m m
,lm',1 m

.__

I

c ":

m=

'-!

I " +__o.m ,,r._.,::
+--+")++';0

"g

0

L

/

=

<

6. THE BRITTLE BONES OF DECONDITIONING

Helmut G. Hinghofer-Szalkay"

Better to hunt in fields, for health unbought, than fee the doctor for a nauseous draught.
The wise, for cure, on exercise depend; God never made his work, for man to mend.
JOHN DRYDEN

INTRODUCTION

Bed-rest (BR) deconditioning studies of healthy human subjects have provided a wealth of data on how the body normally reacts to reduced mechanical loading of the skeletal system. These studies were limited in duration, however, mostly for ethical reasons. Long-duration spaceflight offers an important alternative model; most missions have not yet lasted longer than 6 months, but some have already reached or exceeded 1 year. Future missions to Mars will last even longer, with at least 12 months of microgravity exposure for those traveling between Earth and Mars, and less than half of Earth's gravitational pull will be experienced during their stay there.

What have we learned about bone physiology and pathophysiology from simulated and real loss of gravitational acceleration, and what consequences ensue regarding the proper use of preventive measures against osteoporosis? Available knowledge will provide for application of novel therapeutic countermeasures which might revolutionize treatments for bone loss (Mundy et al., 1999; Vogel, 1999). This chapter first summarizes basic information about bone biomechanics, biochemistry, and physiology, and then presents their applied and clinical aspects, with emphasis on insights gained from research with human volunteers, astronauts, and patients.

Bone integrity is sustained by a cycle of constant formation of new bone and

resorption of old bone. Mechanical stimuli act in a trophic fashion on bone tissue; but how

these forces are perceived, what the target cells are, how the sensors communicate messages into sensible cells, and by what pathways the cells finally respond are still unclear. But it

seems that mechanisms mediating bone loss through disuse are similar in all forms and

etiologies of osteoporosis, and that spaceflight-

real and simulated-

therefore provides

valuable information on molecular and physiological mechanisms involved.

"Institute for Adaptive and Spaceflight Physiology, Medicine, Graz, Austria

Austrian Society for Aerospace

TheBrittle Bonesof Deconditioning

DuringprolongedBR thebalancebetweenboneformationandbreakdownis disruptedandresorptionpredominatesre, sultingin bonelossandosteoporosi(sBloomfield, 1997;Fukuokaet al., 1994; LeBlanc et al., 1990, 1995; Nishimura et al., 1994; Vico et al.,
1987). Osteoporosis is characterized by a parallel reduction in bone mineral and bone matrix so that bone content is decreased but its normal composition remains (Finkelstein, Mitlak, and Slovik, 1997). It is a common metabolic bone disease and represents a major health-care problem affecting up to 50% of all women and 25% of men over age 50, with the main consequence being hip and vertebral fractures (1.3 million per year in the U.S.). Medical treatment and long-term care of these patients cost many billions of dollars. One out of five patients will die within one year as a consequence of hip fracture. Osteoporosis can be caused by excessively increased bone resorption (low calcium availability, high calcium loss, hormonal disturbances), reduced bone formation (Nordin, 1997), or both.

About half the variance in bone density is stable because of a heredity-genetic

baseline (Turner, 1999), but a large proportion of the nonheritable variance may be a result

of life-style factors (Krall and Dawson-Hughes, 1993). The latter is the link to BR or

immobilization: a significant life-style change that affects bone strength, fracture risk, and

health and well-being. Prolonged BR, inactivity, or spaceflight are good models for

investigations into the mechanisms of, and preventive strategies for, skeletal

deconditioning and osteoporosis (Cowin, 1998; White, 1998). Research into its

physiology, pathophysiology,

diagnosis, and prevention is important for dedicated

scientific, epidemiological,

medical, and health-care workers.

Bone is one of the strongest biological materials on Earth because it contains

organic materials that convey strength and stability, as well as minerals that contribute

stiffness -in a way similar to that of the steel rods and cement in reinforced concrete. Life

on Earth has evolved under the constant influence of that ubiquitous force called gravity.

When the first creatures left the sea about 400 million years ago, they had to evolve a strong

weight-bearing skeletal system because their body mass was no longer supported by

hydrostatic buoyancy (but water immersion can be employed as a model of deconditioning).

On Earth, the largest forces affecting humans are usually those associated with gravity. On

the other hand, any reduction of gravitational force also reduces the necessity for peak

counter-force generation. In addition to longitudinal pressure, muscular force patterns are

transmitted to bone as the supportive and power-distributing

system; thus gravitational

force directly and indirectly governs the trophic stimuli that bone continually receives. How

this highly specialized bone tissue is capable of responding and adapting to these forces is

the main topic of this chapter.

Osseal tissue has enormous capacity for growth, regeneration, and remodeling. The mechanism ofosteoblast recruitment at the site of bone formation has not been fully elucidated, although the immediate environment of the cells plays a role by means of cellmatrix interactions. Matrix and cell surface proteoglycans are important for the control of cellular growth factors during chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. Integrins, which transduce signals from the extracellular matrix to the intracellular compartment, mediate the adhesion ofosteoclasts during bone resorption. Vitamin D both upregulates integrin expression in mononucleated osteoclast precursors and stimulates their differentiation into osteoclasts,

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-2-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

suggesting that integrins play a role during osteoclast differentiation (Boissy However, the precise role of integrin molecules, individually and in concert, matrix interactions remains unclear.

et al., 1998). in bone-cell

To keep bone strong and flexible it is clear that the rigidity of the skeleton is directly related to its load-bearing function, which is associated with body size and mass. More than a century ago Wolff (1892) postulated that the structure of bone reflects the mechanical loading it has experienced; also, the term "functional adaptation" was proposed to refer to the process of bone remodeling resulting from its mechanical history (Roux, 1895). Later it was shown, in those with a sedentary life style, that their average bone loss is greater than in more active people. Bone mass may actually be increased by weight-bearing exercise including running (Aloia et at, 1978; Dalsky et at, 1988; Eisman et at, 1991; Raab et at, 1991; Pruitt et at, 1992). However, it seems that physical exercise is not, as in children or young adults (Bassey and Ramsdale, 1994), able to increase bone mass in aging humans, in whom exercise functions to minimize bone loss (Bassey and Ramsdale, 1995; Frost, 1997).

Consideration of factors other than bone mass (such as tendency to fall) may be important for determining which persons will have fractures, since patients with hip fractures do not appear to be more osteoporotic than a control population of the same age (Cummings, 1985). Whereas vertebral fractures seem to be caused mainly by osteoporosis alone, general frailty and inadequate motor reflexes, particularly in the elderly, are major contributing factors for hip fractures (Elffors, 1998). The latter might shift the focus of mechanisms toward neurological and psychological factors, thereby complementing the purely biomechanical models of fracture risk. Considering population shifts toward increasing longevity, projections of fracture occurrence are too conservative, and the establishment of more effective risk-prevention programs becomes more important.

PHYSIOLOGY OF BONE METABOLISM

Bone is a complex tissue that serves three main purposes: it provides mechanical support for postural and locomotor activity, it is a long-term calcium reserve, and it protects hematopoietic tissue. The mineralized matrix consists of two-thirds highly ordered crystals and one-third organic component called osteoid. The mineral compartment contains 90% hydroxyapatite (Ca/P), 6% carbonate, 1% nitrate, 0.7% sodium, 0.7% magnesium, and trace elements, for example, fluoride. The osteoid component consists of 95% collagen-I which provides the framework on which bone mineral is deposited. Collagen molecules cross-link to form precisely shaped fibrils; spaces between these fibrils and the ends of collagen molecules provide initiation sites for crystal formation. Thus, calcium phosphate crystals, located predominantly between collagen fibrils, have their long axes oriented in parallel with the fibrils. Noncollagenous proteins are composed of osteonectin (23%), osteocalcin (15%), sialoprotein (9%), phosphoproteins (9%), glycoproteins (5%), proteoglycans (4%), albumin (3%), matrix Gla-protein (2%), and other proteins like decorin and biglycan. Their specific distribution

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-3-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

and spatial relationships may be related to their function formation, such as recruitment, attachment, and cellular 2000; Ingrain et al., 1993; Triffit, 1987).

during activity

bone resorption and (Groeneveld and Burger,

The metabolic activity of bone has two objectives: it must respond to systemic needs by providing adequate calcium for use within other body compartments and, at the same time, support its own local integrity and mechanical strength. Systemic regulatory mechanisms are mainly hormonal; local mechanisms mainly, but not exclusively, physiochemical (Dunston, 2000). Although these homeostatic functions are not independent -- for example, an inadequate calcium supply can lead to bone demineralization, and bone disease may impair calcium balance -- it is clear that the maintenance of appropriate ionized calcium content in the extracellular fluid takes precedence over maintenance ofbone structural integrity.

About 5% of bone surface is covered by osteoblasts, and 1% by osteoclasts. Osteoblasts arise from progenitors in connective tissue and form a continuous sheet on the surface of newly forming bone. They form collagen and other proteins, and (probably) also promote mineralization by secreting calcium-rich vesicles into the calcifying osteoid. Further, they cleave pyrophosphate by means of alkaline phosphatase, thus removing a stabilizing factor and, at the same time, increase the concentration of phosphate, which promotes crystal formation. The exchange of calcium, phosphate, and other components between bone and other bodily tissues occurs across the bone membrane. The bone membrane is a continuous layer of cells comprising the periosteum, the endosteum cells that line the Haversian canals, and the osteocytes, all of which actively participate in bone mineral transport, solubilization, and crystallization. These key events are pH-dependent; they are determined by physicochemical equilibria related to the concentrations of calcium, phosphate, and other constituents in bone water; and are regulated by local mechanical peak forces as well as hormones, paracrine factors, and cytokines. Under physiologic conditions, the calcium and phosphate in solution are in a metastable solution, that is, their concentration would be high enough for precipitation. However, other constituents, particularly pyrophosphate, stabilize the solution.

Both compact and trabecular bone (80% and 20% of the bone mass, respectively) have tiny chambers that contain osteocytes, and interconnecting canaliculi through which osteocytes communicate by means of cytoplasmic processes. In compact bone this network provides a continuous connection between the periostal and endostal surfaces. Besides cellular components, compact bone contains extracellular (bone) fluid which forms a compartment of its own. The surface area of bone matrix that is in contact with this pool has been estimated to be 1,000 to 5,000 m 2, which is considerably more area than the entire absorptive surface within the gastrointestinal tract. Because of its spongelike structure, trabecular bone provides more than 80% of this huge exchange interface although its mass is only about 20% of the total skeleton.

Osteocytes are the most abundant cells (10:1) of the osteoblast lineage and receive

nourishment and signals by way of their gap-junction-equipped

cytoplasmic processes.

They are differentiated osteoblasts which became entrapped in bone matrix during growth

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-4-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

or remodeling. Together with osteoblasts and quiescent lining cells, they comprise the socalled bone membrane. The bone surface is covered mainly by flat (bone-lining) cells with few organelles, a condensed nucleus, and low metabolic activity. But they are connected to each other and to superficial osteocytes with cell processes extending into canaliculi, equipped with gap junctions, thus contributing to a syncytium formed by all bone cells except osteoclasts (Moss, 1991).

place fig. 1 about here

This system (Fig. 1) comprises an information network in which each osteocyte

has (probably) up to 80 cytoplasmic processes, approximately 15 mm long, arrayed in a

three-dimensional

manner that permits them to interconnect with up to 12 neighboring

osteocytes (Paiumbo, Palazzini, and Marotti, 1990). Neither the osteocyte nor its cytoplasmic processes entirely fills the lacuna and canaliculi in which they reside; rather,

there is an extracellular space between the bone wall and cellular compartment which contains bone fluid and macromolecular complexes, with a higher proportion of large

proteoglycans than in the calcified interlacunar matrix (Sauren et al., 1992). This sheath

of unmineralized matrix is easily penetrated even by macromolecules.

This entire

arrangement provides both an intracellular (gap junctions) and an extracellular route for

the rapid passage of electrical and chemical information throughout bone tissue, including osteons which are also crossed by canaliculi (Curtis, Ashrafi, and Weber, 1985).

The feedback mechanism by which the bone senses changes in load and initiates the deposition or resorption of bone tissue is not completely understood. Can an osteocyte or an osteoblast sense changes in the gravitational field directly and independently of changes in its environment, or does it detect those changes from its environment indirectly by contact stress? Adhesive forces on osteoblasts or osteocytes are three to four orders of magnitude larger than the gravitational forces resulting from cell weight (Cowin, 1998). Is it the magnitude or the rate of strain that is the controlling factor for local bone metabolism? Strategies for coping with the deterioration of the musculoskeletal system during long-term bed rest, immobilization, or spaceflight are dependent upon the answer to this question. It appears that the functional responses during deconditioning involve simultaneous mechanical, bioelectric, and biochemical processes.

Recent data indicate that strain affects both collagen and mineral

microarchitecture,

and that tensile forces are associated with increased tissue anisotropy

and associated physical load (Takano et al., 1999). Bone seems to sense only time-

varying forces, because a constant, nontime-varying force applied to bone has the same

effect as no force (Rubin and Lanyon, 1987). Thus, it would not be the absence of gravity

per se that induces bone loss during spaceflight (or inactivity), but rather the time-varying

force systems acting on the bone which are fundamentally changed because of

ambulatory changes (Cowin, 1998).

It has also been suggested that fluid flow through bone interstices plays a crucial role in the transduction of extracellular mechanical phenomena to intracellular responses

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-5-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

(Reich, Gay, and Frango, 1990; Jones, Leivsetti, and Tenbosch, 1995). Strain-dependent

propulsion of interstitial fluid through lacunar-canalicular

channels contributes to the

transport of nutrients, waste products, and signal molecules (Burger and Klein-Nulend,

1999), and seems to activate bone cells mechanically by means of osteoblasts or

osteocytes (Turner, 1999). Osteocytes are extremely sensitive to fluid flow, resulting in

increased prostaglandin, as well as nitric oxide production. The osteocyte is situated to

directly sense the bone strain fluid movement: peak physiological loading induces shear stresses of 0.8-3.0 Pa (Weinbaum, Cowin, and Zeng, 1994) within the canaliculi, which also will strain the macromolecular connections between the osteocyte and its

extracellular matrix. This transduction mechanism then would transmit information by

means of integrins to the cell membrane and on to the cytoskeleton, resulting in genomic

regulation within the nucleus (Wang, Butler, and Ingber, 1993; Banes et al., 1995).

Various cytokines in the osseal micro-environment

regulate, at least in part, the

dynamics of bone metabolism. For instance, bone represents the largest reservoir for

transforming growth factor (TGF-B) which is attached to a special binding protein; TGF-13

inhibits resorption by suppressing osteoclast recruitment and activity, and is a potent

osteoblastic mitogen. Interleukin-6, produced by osteoblasts and stromal cells, increases

bone resorption and promotes osteoclastogenesis.

Some components of the insulin-like

growth factor (IGF) system are also abundantly expressed in human bone; IGF-I and

IGF-II are mitogens that enhance differentiation of osteoblasts. The actions of such

cytokines provide a target for steroid hormones, notably estrogens and androgens

(Hofbauer and Khosla, 1999).

BONE STRENGTH

Because terms such as stress, strain, strength, and elasticity are often used when discussing bone, it is important to have a clear understanding of their meaning (Cowin, 1998; Frost, 1995; Gordon, 1991):
Stress (s) is the force (f) acting in a certain direction at a certain point within a material, divided by the area (A) on which the force acts; s = f/A. It can be expressed in any units of force over any units of area, preferably (SI standards) as N'm 2 (or Pa)'.
Strength is usually defined as the stress that is needed to break a given material. Stress tells how strongly the molecules at any point in a solid material are being pulled apart. For equal strain (see below), stiffer materials generate larger stresses than more "compliant" materials. Enamel is stiffer than lamellar bone, which again is more resistant than woven bone. The ultimate "fracture force" of bone is about 130 MPa (18,855 lb'in2). Although bone mass is highly correlated with bone strength, 25%-30% of the observed variation of bone strength is probably attributable to the cumulative and synergistic
'N = Newton (MN = mega-Newton, GN = giga-Newton), Pa = Pascal.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-6-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

effects of other factors such as bone microstructure, (Kleerekoper et aL, 1985).

architecture, and state of remodeling

Strain (e), which is is not to be confused with stress, tells us how far the molecules at any point in a solid material are being pulled apart; that is, by what proportion of the bonds between them are stretched. It is given as a relative change in length (e = A1/L where: 1 = increase of length and L = original length) and is usually expressed as percentage. Strain is a ratio and has no units.

The elasticity of a given material can be characterized by the relationship between stress and strain, and is plotted in a "stress-strain diagram," the shape of which is usually not affected by the size of the tested sample. If the result is a straight line, the material is said to obey Hooke's law; the slope of the line is a measure of the material's elastic stiffness. This (constant) ratio of stress to strain is Young's elastic modulus (E = s/e). Obviously, E has the same dimension as stress (e.g., MN'm2). Many common sott biological materials cannot be characterized with any standard value of E since they do not obey Hooke's law. Fresh bone has an elastic modulus of._21 GN.m 2. For comparison, human tendon has a modulus of 0.6, plywood 7.0, glass 70, and steel 210 GN'm -2.

There is disagreement concerning whether tissue anisotropy has an effect on the apparent elastic properties of cancellous bone. Using finite-element analysis with experimental data, it has been shown that the empirically observed variation of Young's moduli could be predicted to [] 92% by a finite-element model (Kabel et al., 1999). Thus, an "effective isotropic tissue modulus" concept seems applicable for practical purposes.

Bone mineral density (BMD) accounts for 70%-75% of bone strength (Faulkner, 2000; Heany, 1989; Ott, 1993). Several types of bone are routinely evaluated to represent the entire skeleton. The radius is used to represent the cortical bone, cancellous bone is represented by the lumbar spine, mixed bone by the proximal hip or neck of the femur, and the calcaneus is 90%-95% trabecular bone. Bone density changes are used to assess altered mineralization in the lower extremities, especially during bed-rest or spaceflight deconditioning. In osteoporotic persons, the calcaneal mineral density is a good predictor of vertebral and femoral neck fractures (Cheng et al., 1994; Vogel, Wasnich, and Ross, 1988).

Absorptiometry appears to be the most sensitive method for monitoring bonemineral content; ultrasound techniques also provide information on bone quality

(Brandenburger,

1993; Sone et aL, 1998) which influences bone fragility (Schnitzler,

1993). Bone-mineral content assessment is performed using photodensitometry

or photon

absorptiometry and other techniques such as radiogrammetry,

photon scattering,

computed tomography (CT)-scan, or neutron single-photon and dual-energy absorptiometry is the variable to be determined.

activation analysis (Tothill, 1989); but are currently the method of choice if BMD

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-7-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Single-photon absorptiometry is used to evaluate bones not surrounded by much sott tissue (e.g., the radius). A photon-emitting radionuclide is passed over the area to be studied, with a scintillator photon detector on the opposite side. The number of photons absorbed increases with bone density in the scanning path. The relative absorption is calibrated as bone mass (grams) per unit length of bone (centimeter). Dual-energy absorptiometry uses more energy so more soft tissue can be penetrated (e.g., spine, hip). Two methods are available: dual-photon absorptiometry (DPA) uses a gamma source (typically gadolinium-153 which produces 44- and 100-keV photons), whereas dualenergy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) works in the x-ray spectrum.

Qualitative ultrasound scanners measure the broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA, given in decibels per megahertz; central frequency, 0.5 MHz-- attenuation-based bone assessment) and the speed of sound (velocity-based bone assessment); both are referenced to the ultrasonic velocity through water at body temperature [37 oC (98.6 °F)]. Ultrasound interacts with bone in a fundamentally different way than electromagnetic radiation. Although high correlations can be found between bone density derived from ultrasound and electromagnetic absorption measurements (Moils et al., 1995), ultrasound propagation through bone may provide additional information on bone quality, such as mechanical properties and microstructure. Therefore it is more likely to indicate the biomechanical competence of the skeleton (Kaufman and Einhorn, 1993). BUA can identify hip fractures with an 80% sensitivity (Baran et al., 1988) and is now widely used in both clinical and experimental settings, including spaceflight medical investigations.

Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) of vertebral bones produces high errors

(10%-30%) because of variations in marrow fat and osteoid (Mazess and Whedon, 1983); it can be used as a valid indicator of neither vertebral strength nor whole-body bone

density. QCT could predict femoral and hip fracture risk, but the radiation dose is much

higher than that of DPA. For these reasons, QCT is not recommended assessment.

for BMD

Early intervention in patients with osteopenia is necessary to prevent its progression to osteoporosis. Bone density should generally exceed 1 g'cm 2, and it is
reported as a standard deviation from mean values: osteopenia is defined as 1.0-2.5 SD below normal; and osteoporosis as >2.5 SD below normal. Osteoporosis is indicated by a > 10% density loss relative to a reference value matched for sex, age, height, weight, and race. Density values between 0.80 and 0.99 g.em 2 are associated with less than a 20% chance of spontaneous fractures, whereas values <0.62 g/cm 2 are indicative of a twofold increase in fracture risk.

BIOCHEMICAL

MARKERS OF BONE METABOLISM

Bone is in a dynamic state--being broken down continuously (resorption) and reformed (formation) by the action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, respectively. Bone metabolism occurs at the bone surface at focused sites termed bone metabolism units

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-8-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning
(BMUs). At any given time, there are about 1 million BMUs in various phases of the bone cycle; as much as 25% of trabecular bone and 3% of cortical bone is resorbed and replaced each year (Parfitt, 1994).
Both resorption and formation give rise to the release of several "markers" into the bloodstream. Consequently, concentration changes of these markers are used to assess the dynamic state of bone; none provides unambiguous information on the skeleton's actual remodeling balance; however, because local gain of bone mass in one location along with bone loss in another probably blurs the picture.
If activation is initiated on a particular bone site, osteoclasts are attracted to the new BMU where they erode the matrix to form a dip (Howship's lacuna, Fig. 1). Each osteoclast forms a tight sealing zone at the "outer rim" of the developing lacuna and releases numerous lysosomal and nonlysosornal substances, such as lysozyme, phosphatase, glucuronidase, collagenases, hydrogen ions. It takes approximately 1 week for the lacuna to reach a depth of about 50 _tm, at which time resorption stops, the osteoclast detaches, and osteoblasts are recruited to the BMU. They lay down new osteoid into the lacuna, beginning at its bottom and proceeding until the hole is again filled giving the site increased tensile strength. The entire process takes up to 80 days; however, mineralization of the newly formed matrix is initiated soon by also moving bottom-up in parallel with osteoid formation. The remodeled area finally passes into a quiescent phase to complete the bone cycle which takes 2-3 months. Incomplete filling by osteoblasts (as in older men) or exaggerated erosion by osteoclasts (as in postmenopausal women) create a deficit in osseous mechanical strength and, therefore, fracture risk.
Assessment of bone turnover should be based on those sequences of bone cycle. Resorption markers should reflect osteoclast activity or collagen degradation; formation markers, on the other hand, should reflect osteoblastic synthetic activity or extracellular metabolism of proeollagen. The "markers" described below are utilized (Blumsohn and Eastell, 1997; Calvo, Eyre, and Gundberg, 1996; Christenson, 1997; Epstein, 1988; Garnero and Delmas, 1998).
Resorption Markers
Urinary calcium
Fasting urine calcium concentration lacks diagnostic value because it is affected by variations in diet, metabolism, renal function, and hormone activity levels. Nonetheless, calcium excretion has been frequently monitored in astronauts and bedrested subjects to assess general bone mineral loss. Urinary calcium loss occurs during the entire duration of bed rest (Greenleaf and Kozlowski, 1982; Krasnoff and Painter, 1999).

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-9-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Acid phosphatase

Five acid phosphatase (AP) isoenzymes have been identified; their major sources are bone, prostatic gland, platelets, red cells, and the spleen. Osteoclasts produce high amounts of the bone isoenzyme which "leaks" into the bloodstream during resorption and after detachment of the osteoclast's sealing zone. Bone AP retains its activity after treatment with L(+)tartrate, so tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) is indicative of the level of bone isoenzyme, although this measure is not entirely specific. A monoclonal immunoassay for bone AP has been developed, but it also lacks specificity. Serum has higher AP activity than plasma because erythrocytes release AP during the in vitro clotting process; md AP is unstable without special treatment to lower its pH. Thus, it can be concluded that characterization of AP as a marker of bone metabolism is
incomplete. Consequently, its use in spaceflight or bed-rest studies is limited.

Hydroxyproline

Posttranslational hydroxylation of collagen-residue prolin gives rise to

hydroxyproline (HP) which comprises about 13% of collagen. After collagen breakdown, HP is not reutilized; instead it is catabolized (90%) or excreted as small peptides by the

kidneys. Consequently, urine HP can be used as a marker of bone breakdown. However,

one procollagen extension peptide (PINP, see below) which emerges during bone formation also gives rise to liP excretion. Furthermore, inflammation also elevates

urinary HP level because the complement factor C 1q contains a sequence similar to that

of collagen. Finally, HP is present in the diet, particularly in gelatine-containing

food

(urine sampling after an overnight fast eliminated dietary effects on HP excretion). In

summary, HP excretion is a suitable bone resorption marker if potential errors can be excluded and HP excretion has often been employed as an indicator ofbone loss in

spaceflight and BR studies (Ellis, Welch, and Prescott, 1979; Lockwood et al., 1979;

Schneider, 1991; Smith et aL, 1977; Van der Weil, 1991).

Galactosyl hydroxylysine

Hydroxylysine is a modified amino acid peculiar to collagens. Its glycosylated form, galactosyl hydroxylysine (GHyl), is probably not reused after collagen degradation and it is not absorbed in significant amounts from the diet. Because of tissue-specific differences in the ratios of GHyl, and its glucosylated form (GIc.GHyl) which mostly emanates from skin collagens, GHyl is relatively specific to bone degradation (Pinnell, Fox, and Krane, 1971; Krane et al., 1977). In urine, 80% of the total hydroxylysine appears as glycoside, 10% is free, and 10% is peptide-bound; this 80/20 ratio is agedependent, because the free and peptide-bound fractions are most prominent in the urine of infants and children (Askenasi, 1975). GHyl has been used as an indicator of bone collagen destruction in recent deconditioning investigations (AI-Dehaimi, Blumsohn, and Eastell, 1999).

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- I0-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Telopeptides
During resorption, the osteoclasts degrade collagen to small fractions [Ntelopeptides (NTX) and C-telopeptides (CTX)] which are specific for bone resorption since different fractions are formed during breakdown ofnonskeletal collagen. They are released into the circulation and readily pass through renal glomeruli into the urine. Although several factors can interfere with renal elimination of NTX and CTX, their excretion is fairly specific for bone degradation. Serum type I collagen cross-linked C-telopeptide (ICTP) seems to be a reliable bone resorption marker (Eriksen et al., 1993) and has been used in BR investigations (Zerwekh et al., 1998).

Pyridinoline cross-links

Stabilization of mature collagen and elastin requires the formation of pyridinoline

(Pyr) and deoxypyridinoline

(D-Pyr) cross-links (Fig. 2). These are formed by post-

translational processing of lysine and hydroxylysine, mainly in bone tissue, and are

released into the extracellular fluid aider bone degradation without being metabolized.

This makes them fairly specific resorption markers; 60% of them are bound to plasma

protein and the remaining 40% are filtered and excreted in the urine (Kamel et al., 1995).

Pyr and D-Pyr are widely used in investigations of deconditioning (Nishimura et al., 1994; Smith et al., 1998), and D-Pyr is found almost exclusively in bone (Eyre, Koob,

and Van Ness, 1984). Pyr and D-Pyr excretion has been determined during long-term

spaceflight (Smith et al., 1999).

place fig. 2 about here

Formation Markers

Procollagen-I extension peptides

Procollagen-I is an osteoblast-derived

precursor of collagen. Its carboxy- and

amino-terminal peptide ends are "clipped" during post-translational

extracellular

processing giving rise to the carboxyterminal propeptide (PICP) and aminoterminal

peptide (PINP) ofprocollagen-I.

The PICP is taken up by mannose receptors and PINP

by scavenger receptors of endothelial cells in the liver. Hepatic clearance must be

considered when quantifying serum PICP and PINP levels, which should be good

markers of bone formation. PIPC reflects the first step ofosteoblastic

differentiation

because it is linked to collagen synthesis (Risteli and Risteli, 1993).

Alkaline phosphatase

The second step of osteoblastic differentiatiorv---enabling

matrix maturation----

releases alkaline phosphatase (ALP) into the systemic circulation. Blood carries four

isoenzymes that are somewhat specific for liver, bone, intestines, and placenta. The

tetrameric bone-specific isoenzyme (B-ALP, a glycoprotein) is produced by osteoblasts

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- 11 -

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

and is involved in bone mineralization, probably by means of a breakdown of

pyrophosphate which inhibits calcium phosphate deposition. The B-ALP, an excellent indicator of general bone formation, is released into the circulation in dimeric form after

cleavage by a phospholipase serum B-ALP measurement.

(Howard et al., 1987). Numerous assays are available for

Osteocalcin

Mature osteoblasts produce osteocalcin (OC) (or BGP for bone gla protein), a vitaminK-dependent calcium-binding peptide which is one of the bone matrix's most abundant noncollagenous proteins. Being connected to matrix mineralization, it represents the final step of osteoblastic differentiation (Risteli and Risteli, 1993). Osteocalcin is mainly deposited in the bone matrix during formation, whereas about 15% of it escapes into the circulation, where it can be detected in both intact and fragmented forms (Delmas et al., 1985). When bone is resorbed, some of the deposited OC is degraded, but up to 70% enters the circulation. Therefore, plasma OC may be both newly synthesized during formation and released during resorption. When the two processes are uncoupled, OC is considered a marker of osteoblast activity; otherwise, its serum level mirrors the paramount intensity of bone turnover.

RESULTS FROM BED-REST STUDIES

Removal of mechanical loading leads to muscle atrophy as well as to increased bone resorption such as that observed with disuse during body casting (Deitrick et al.. 1948; Patel, Razzak, and Dastur, 1969; Sargeant et al., 1977) or prolonged BR without exercise training (Krupina et al., 1982; Saltin et al., 1968). The similarities in calcium and bone changes during long-term spaceflight and BR deconditioning are striking: decreased bone formation, increased bone resorption, continued urinary and fecal calcium loss, bone redistribution, decreased plasma 1,25(OH)2D (the biologically active form of vitamin D), and no consistent changes in plasma parathyroid hormone (Bikle, Halloran, and Morey-Holton, 1997; Bloomfield, 1997; Zerwekh et al., 1998). Bone mineral losses during prolonged deconditioning may well exceed 10% per year (LeBlanc et al., 1990). Urinary and fecal calcium excretion are increased by 20%-50% (Amaud et al., 1992; Van der Weil et al., 1991; Zerwekh et al., 1998). Calcium loss begins a few days into BR and stays elevated, leading to ever-increasing negative calcium balance (Greenleaf and Kozlowski, 1982; Krasnoff and Painter, 1999).
During 4 months of BR deconditioning, an average bone mineral density decrease of about 1% per month has been observed in the spine, pelvis, and femur, together with increased osteoclastic activity (biopsy) and decreased mineralization parameters; pyridinoline cross-link excretion was elevated and calcium absorption and 1,25(OH)2D levels decreased. More than 10% of the bone mass was lost from the calcanei and 3% from femoral neck and spine, but skull bone density increased by 3% (Chappard et al., 1989; LeBlanc et aI., 1990, 1995; Vico et aI., 1987). Thus, the BR data are consistent

Hinghofer-Szatkay

- 12-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

with spaceflight results in that bones that encounter the largest gravitational stress with ambulation in a 1-G environment experience the greatest losses in bone mineral content when this mechanical load is removed. The loss of calcaneal mass reflects the marked
decrease of force normally exerted by muscles inserting onto the Achilles' tendon during standing, walking, and running. The associated antigravity muscles, such as the triceps surae, also undergo the greatest atrophy during weightlessness and BR (Grigoryeva and Kozlovskaya, 1987).

The upper extremities maintain or even increase their bone density, probably because the workload on the arms is maintained or even elevated during deconditioning. The cause for increased bone mass in the skull is not clear; it might be a result of increased hydrostatic forces in the upper body caused by the cephalad fluid shitis that occur both in weightlessness and during horizontal and head-down positioning (Bikle, Halloran, and Morey-Holton, 1997).

Overall bone loss saturates urinary calcium excretion despite gradually decreasing

intestinal calcium absorption--from

31% to 24% of dietary intake over 17 weeks of

horizontal BR (LeBlanc et al., 1995), causing hypercalciuria and highly increased risk of

kidney stone formation (Sawin, 1998). Increased fecal calcium loss eventually accounts

for 50% of the negative calcium balance observed atter 2 months of BR. Bone biopsies in 20 healthy males atter 4 months of BR showed an increase of about 50% in bone

resorption surface (Bloomfield, 1997; Vico et al., 1987). The Pyr cross-link excretion

increased, but parathormone, calcitonin, osteocalcin, and B-ALP plasma levels were not

altered significantly (LeBlanc et al., 1995; Smith et al., 1998; Zerwekh et al., 1998). However, in patients with functionally complete immobilization where muscular activity

has ceased, consistently low parathormone levels have been observed (Bergmann et al.,

1977).

In 50 male and female stroke-immobilized

(30-180 days) patients aged 47-74 yr,

bone resorption markers increased continually with deconditioning duration (urinary Pyr and D-Pyr excretion reached doubled to tripled values after 6 months BR, as did serum ICTP concentration), whereas formation markers (B-ALP, PIPC) remained within the

normal range in all patients regardless of the duration of the immobilization (Fiore et al.,

1998). Thus, it seems that during BR immobilization an uncoupling occurs between bone

formation and resorption such that bone collagen breakdown is not a self-limiting process

but is ongoing.

Biphosphonate treatment, together with a 1-2 hrtday exercise program, proved

effective in reducing BR-induced bone loss (Chappard et al., 1989; Grigoriev et al.,

1992). The time course of changes of biochemical markers for osseal metabolism seems

to indicate that antiresorptive drugs might serve as a useful countermeasure

for

deconditioning-induced

bone loss (Zerwelda et al., 1998). However, it remains an open

question as to what extent physical exertion and antiresorptive therapy, singly or

combined, can substitute for the loss of mechanical loading resulting from postural

control, locomotion, and upright exercise in a weightless or BR environment.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-13-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning
1

In summary, results from long-duration BR studies in healthy persons without

application of countermeasures

indicate a bone loss that is similar to, or possibly lower

than, that measured during spaceflight (Fig. 3). The biochemical changes that precede

bone loss occur quite rapidly: according to marker time-profiles, bone resorption is

elevated as early as the first days ofdeconditioning

(Van der Weil et al., 1991; Smith et

al., 1998). About 0.2 g of calcium per day is lost; calcium absorption is decreased; bone

resorption markers are elevated, seemingly rising continually with duration of

deconditioning; formation markers remain unaltered; and plasma 1,25(OHz)-D is

decreased. Bone biopsies revealed increased osteoclastic activity and reduced bone

formation and mineralization (Vico et aI., 1987).

place figure 3 about here

Because of ethical considerations, the effects of very long-duration

immobilization

may never be studied. However, there is one documented extreme "case

study." A young man went to bed in 1932 and remained there for the rest of his life. After

50 years of"bed rest," his limbs were "thin as the legs of a ladder-back chair" (Fortney,

Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1996). This observation supports the hypothesis that with

reduced hydrostatic pressure and inadequate mechanical stimulation, losses continue until no more tissue is left to be absorbed.

muscle and bone

RESULTS FROM SPACEFLIGHT

Extended-duration spaceflight provides another mode for studying the effects of low

mechanical stimulation and accompanying bone loss over long time periods in otherwise fit and healthy humans. Changes in astronauts' bone structure as occur with weightlessness

deconditioning do not constitute true systemic osteoporosis: only weight-bearing bones of

the lower body extremities lose mass, whereas those in the upper body remain more or less

unaffected or even gain substance. A large percentage of bone fractures on Earth in

ambulatory people occur in the hip region, and the overall adaptation--qncluding

metabolic

alterations and endocrine responses--qo reduced physical loading seems to be very similar

in the various models of deconditioning with bone loss.

The question whether exposure to weightlessness per se can influence bone cell

metabolism (Burger and Klein-Mulend, 1998), or if reduced mechanical loading of the

skeleton functions by means of systemic-structural

effects at the interface of the cellular

environment, seems to be resolved. Induced bone loss in humans as a result of direct

gravitation sensing by the osteocytes or osteoblasts is highly unlikely, because constant,

nonvarying force applied to bone has the same effect as no force (Rubin and Lanyon,

1987). Thus, a change in effective gravity, as with BR deconditioning or spaceflight, has essentially no effect on the single bone cell, but it has a major effect on the intact

skeleton. Bone cells receive information on changes in the gravity field from their contact

environment; a 1-G stress on an isolated-cell level is too weak to be perceived (Cowin,

1998). However, several days of weightlessness can reduce the differentiation of

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- i 4-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

osteoblastic 1998).

cells in response to growth-promoting

signal substances (Carmeliet et aL,

One of the first studies of bone loss from human spaceflight emerged from the Gemini program; there was a reduction in bone density with a mineral loss in the os calcis of 2.9%-9.2% after 4-14 days of weightlessness (Mack et al., 1967; Vose, 1974). Further, metabolic studies revealed increased urinary calcium and phosphate excretion in the Gemini VII astronauts (Lutwak et al., 1969). Later, Apollo 17 astronauts exhibited a small but significant loss of total body weight, a 0.2% loss of total body calcium, and a 0.7% loss of total body phosphorus after this 14-day flight, mainly a result of increased fecal (calcium, phosphorus) and urinary (calcium) excretion (Rambaut, Leach, and Johnson, 1975).

These mass and mineral losses were comparable to those reported in BR studies of similar duration, and were confirmed in other studies that indicated increased calcium excretion as well (Johnson, Leach, and Rambaut, 1973; Lutwak et al., 1969), including data from the 28-day Skylab II mission where calcium loss was about 120 mg/day with increased phosphorus and nitrogen excretion (Whedon et a/., 1975), plus decreased mineral content, especially in the os calcis and radius (Vogel and Whittle, 1976b). Reduced bone mineral content was also reported in Apollo crews (Vogel and Whittle, 1976a). Later, bonerelated hormones were measured in Spacelab shuttle astronauts and only transient increases in 1,25(OH)2D levels were found; all other parameters remained unchanged (Morey-Holton et a/., 1988). During a 115-day spaceflight, urinary Pyr and D-Pyr excretion was increased and in three subjects, plasma B-ALP diminished (Smith et a/., 1999). Surprisingly, after 8 months in orbit MIR space station occupants had no clear evidence of altered vertebral bone mineral density (Oganov et a/., 1991), whereas reduced bone mineral density in the pelvis and femoral neck and trochanter occurred in others after up to 10 months of flight (Schneider et al., 1992). Preflight and postflight measurements accompanying 8-month missions revealed, in contrast to the hypothesized loss oftrabecular bone from the vertebral body because of unloading, that there was little or no bone loss at this site, a finding that apparently validates the effectiveness of the exercise training regimen for preventing spinal bone loss, as well as minimizing calcaneal losses (Oganov eta/., 1990).

The Russian inflight exercise countermeasure program for cosmonauts induced the vertical loads produced on the bones during normal ambulation or running on Earth, but it did not exercise the antigravity postural muscles in the back. These muscles hold the body erect while standing or help return the torso to its normal position when twisting movements are performed. Mechanical load exerted by these muscles on the spine are not transmitted to the vertebral bodies, but to the transverse and spinous bony processes to which the muscles are attached; consequently, if those muscles are not exercised they will not load the bone. Analysis of CT data showed that even though the vertebral bodies did not lose bone, the posterior elements lost 8% which accompanied a 4% decrease in the volume of the muscles attached to the bone (Oganov et al., 1990).

Because most space missions inadequate data for use in estimating After 1 year in orbit, one cosmonaut

do not last longer than 6 months, there are the ultimate extent of bone loss after longer flights. lost 10% of his trabecular bone from the upper

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- 15-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

lumbar vertebrae, and another gained 5% mineral density (Grigoriev et al., 1991). However, for two cosmonauts in space for more than 300 days, the rate of bone loss in the spine was about half the overall body average, whereas changes in the lower legs were average (LeBlanc, Shackelford, and Schneider, 1998). These findings suggest that bone loss continues only where the mechanical stimulation remains very low despite the bungee cord, treadmill, and cycle exercises performed in orbit, whereas the rate of loss decreases in other skeletal regions.

Although stress-related hormones (e.g., plasma levels of cortisol and IGF-1)

remained unresponsive, extended-duration spaceflight resulted in not only strongly

depressed bone formation, but also increased bone resorption (Caillot-Augusseau

et al.,

1998); others, however, failed to find evidence of increased resorption activity (Collet et al.,

1997). This discrepancy probably reflects different mission profiles and circumstances which also occur in BR investigations (LeBlanc et al., 1990). A consistent finding is low in-

flight and increased post-flight PTH plasma levels which can be explained as a consequence

of changed bone remodeling, that is, calcium loss in-flight and hyper-remodeling

after

landing (Caillot-Augusseau et al., 1998; LeBlanc, Shackelford, and Schneider, 1998). Short-term changes inflight seem to occur only in trabecular bone of the lower legs

(weight-bearing bones), whereas atter several months in orbit a more general disuse

degradation ensues, comparable to the generalized bone loss observed in the iliac crest of

paraplegic patients (Collet et al., 1997). When bone loss is regional, that is, when it is

limited primarily to the weight-beating bones, the whole-body change in biochemical

markers provides an even more convincing evidence for the role of bone resorption,

because the response must be even greater if it is from a smaller portion of the skeleton.

International standardization of experimental protocols will increase the significance of

results (Miyamoto et al., 1998).

BONE RECOVERY AFTER DECONDITIONING

It has been proposed that the recovery of lost bone requires a longer period of time than the duration of the deconditioning (Smith et al., 1977; Collet et al., 1997). Although serum calcium concentration (which is particularly fine-tuned by endocrine regulation) returns to control values immediately after reambulation, serum phosphate concentration may still be elevated for 1 week after an equal duration of BR, as might be

urinary calcium excretion; reduced 1,25(OH)2D levels also have been observed (serum

PTH and urinary phosphate excretion are back to control values at this point; Arnaud et aI., 1992; Van der Wiel et al., 1991; Zerwekh et al., 1998). After 6 weeks,

1,25(OH)2D serum levels are restored, but resorption markers (e.g., hydroxproline

excretion) remain elevated, while serum phosphate levels are decreased at this point (Van der Wiel et al., 1991, in which study complete immobilization including muscle relaxant

drug application was applied on 14 patients with lumbar disc protrusion).

Thus, after

short-term deconditioning, significant alterations may be found even 6 weeks after

reambulation.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- 16-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

With regard to spaceflight, 4-12 weeks in orbit produced partly significant postlanding urinary resorption marker excretion (N-telopeptides, Pyr, and D-Pyr cross-links) for up to 3 weeks in the Skylab 2 crew (4 weeks in orbit), the Skylab 3 crew (9 weeks in orbit), and the Skylab 4 crew (12 weeks in orbit). Data from this investigation were the first to demonstrate that bone resorption is elevated during spaceflight (Smith et al., 1998).

Twelve days of reambulation atter a 12-week period of strict horizontal BR (no head elevation exceeding 30 ° , only horizontal limb movements allowed) failed to bring back resorption markers (urinary hydroxyproline and D-Pyr excretion) in 11 subjects who also displayed increased serum PICP and decreased 1,25(OH)2D and calcium levels
(Zerwekh et al., 1998). In another study, up to 7 weeks atler finishing a 17-week horizontal BR period in eight male subjects, urinary excretion of resorption markers seemingly remained above pre-BR control (but p > 0.05 because of large individual differences) (Smith et at, 1998).

LeBlanc et at (1990) quantified bone loss and recovery from long-term disuse (17 weeks of strict horizontal BR) in six male volunteers by monitoring bone mineral density (BMD) at the lumbar spine, hip, tibia, forearm, calcaneus, and segmental regions from total-body scans. The time-course of BMD was estimated by linear regression, using data points derived from the sampling sites both during and after deconditioning. Whereas a 1% increase in BMD in the radius and a 2% decrease in the tibia were

completely reversed after 6 months of reambulation, the _4% BMD reduction at the

lumbar spine and femoral neck remained unchanged aider 6 months ofreambulation.

A

more than 10% BMD reduction ensued at the calcaneus with 4-months of BR; after 6

months of reambulation the remaining loss was < 2%.

When do physicians need to start worrying about bone loss in BR patients? Not

after a few days, but things get worse with increasing duration of deconditioning:

excess

calcium excretion brings risk of kidney stone formation; material loss from weight-

bearing bones like the calcaneus may exceed 3% per month; losses from the spine and

femur might be irreversible; and last but not least, the rate of bone loss increases in the

presence of additional stress factors that are typical for a clinical setting.

Whereas the hip and spine lose an average of 1% bone mineral per month of BR

or spaceflight in healthy people (double this figure in individual cases; LeBlanc et al.,

1990), comparison of these results with those of clinical studies of injured patients reveals that the rate of bone loss may be much greater than reported for deconditioning

alone: 4-8 times in the spine (Hansson, Roos, and Nachemson, 1975; Krolner and Toft,

1983; Mazess and Whedon, 1983), and 6-12 times in the tibia following non-fracture

injury (Andersson and Nilsson, 1979). Thus, injury and general catabolic state increase the rate of bone loss seen during physiologic adaptation to deconditioning by up to one

order of magnitude. Countermeasures

like exercise should be applied early, and they

need to be targeted primarily at the spine and hip.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- 17-

OUTLOOK

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

There are still unanswered questions about the extent to which the bone lost during deconditioning is unavoidable. Investigations into the physiology of countermeasures applied separately or combined under clearly defined conditions, and using state-of-the-art methods, will continue to provide valuable data that will help to increase our understanding of bone physiology (Skerry, 1997). Studies of this kind almost always produce important spinoffs for health protection, diagnostics, and therapeutic measures, not only because the data can be applied to everyday medical use, but also because they challenge the functional paradigms we take for granted. Weightlessness, combined with the unavoidable isolation (and, potentially, perfect monitoring) of spacefaring humans, still provides a unique and extremely important research opportunity.

LeBlanc, Shackelford, and Schneider (1998) have suggested a number of steps that

should be considered in deconditioning-related

bone research:

1. Current data suggest that several years may be required for complete recovery of bone lost after extended-duration spaceflight; the degree and rate of this reversal of bone loss is not adequately known.

2. How much is the fracture risk increased after long-term deconditioning? This information would allow rational assessment is needed after certain periods of bone loss from disuse.

bed rest or spaceflight of how much protection

3. None of the presently used countermeasures has yet been proved completely effective; others are needed.

4. More data on bone remodeling are needed, particularly monitoring of biochemical markers combined with physical measurements.

5. Intestinal absorption at different points in time should be quantitated further, using stable tracers.

6. More data are needed on local distribution of bone loss (which may be quite

inhomogeneous architecture.

in a given bone), especially sub-regional measurements

of bone

7. Physiological conditions such as general stress, nutrition, fluid shifts, dehydration, and bone prefusion should be emphasized.
8. The ability to better predict the amount of bone loss expected under certain circumstances should be refined.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- ! 8-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning
Bone has fascinating features because it is a living, adaptive, dynamic tissue that presents a multitude of research aspects---physical, biomolecular, cellular (signal processing, extracellular adhesion mechanisms), endocrine, systemic, clinical. Have those challenges received adequate attention from the scientific community? Does the discipline of skeletal physiology suffer from "poor interdisciplinary communication" (Frost, 1997)? If so, the problem would be by no means unique, but rather typical in our era of specialized, speed-driven, reductionistic research. Bone loss resulting from conditions like microgravity or from prolonged BR deconditioning, and increased skeletal stress with hypergravity or vibration, constitute complex problems; ones that require transdisciplinary, integrative, biological, and medical investigation.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

- 19-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

REFERENCES

AI-Dehaimi, A. W., Blumsohn, A., and Eastell, R. Serum galactosyl hydroxylysine as a biochemical marker of bone resorption. Clin. Chem. 45: 676-681, 1999.

Aloia, J. F., Cohn, S. H., Babu, T., Abesamis, C., Kalici, N., and Ellis, K. Skeletal mass and body composition in marathon runners. Metabolism 27:1793-1796, 1978.

Andersson, S. M., and Nilsson, B. E. Changes in bone mineral content following ligamentous knee injuries. Med. Sci. Sports 11: 351-353, 1979.

Arnaud, S. B., Sherrard, D. J., Maloney, N., Whalen, R. T., and Fung, P. Effects of 1-week head-down tilt bed rest on bone formation and the calcium endocrine system. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 63: 14-20, 1992.

Askenasi, R. Urinary excretion of free hydroxylysine, peptide-bound hydroxylysine and hydroxylysyl glycosides in physiological conditions. Clin. Chim. Acta 59: 87-92, 1975.

Banes, A. J., Tsuzaki, M., Yamamoto, J., Fischer, T., Brigman, B., Brown, T., and Miller, L. Mechanoreception at the cellular level: the detection, interpretation, and diversity of responses to mechanical signals. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 73: 349-365, 1995.

Baran, D. T., Kelly, A. M., Kerellas, A., Gionet, M., Proce, M., Leahey, D., Steuterman, S., McSherry, B., and Roche, J. Ultrasound attenuation of the calcaneus in women with osteoporosis and hip fractures. Calcif. Tissue Int. 43: 138-142, 1988.

Bassey, E. J., and Ramsdale, S. J. Increase in femoral bone density in young women following high-impact exercise. Osteoporos. Int. 4: 72-75, 1994.

Bassey, E. J., and Ramsdale, S. J. Weight-bearing exercise and ground reaction forces: a 12month randomized controlled trial of effects on bone-mineral density in healthy postmenopausal women. Bone 16: 469-476, 1995.

Bergmann, P. A., Heilporn, A., Schoutens, study of calcium and bone metabolism 1977.

A., Patemot, in paraplegic

J., and Tricot, A. Longitudinal patients. Paraplegia 15:147-159,

Bikle, D. D., Halloran, B. P., and Morey-Holton, E. Space flight and the skeleton: lessons

for the earthbound. Endocrinologist

7: 10-22, 1997.

Bloomfield, S. A. Changes in musculoskeletal structure and function with prolonged bed rest. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 29: 197-206, 1997.
Blumsohn, A., and Eastell, R. The performance and utility of biochemical markers of bone turnover: do we know enough to use them in clinical practice? Ann. Clin. Biochem. 34: 449-459, 1997.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-20-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Boissy, P., Machuca, I., Pfaff, M., Ficheux, D., and Jurdic, P. Aggregation of mononucleated precursors triggers cell surface expression of alpha v beta 3 integrin, essential to formation of osteoclast-like multinucleated cells. J. Cell Sci. 111: 2563-2574, 1998.

Brandenburger, G. H. Clinical determination Calcif. Tissue Int. 53: S151-S156,1993.

of bone quality: is ultrasound the answer?

Burger, E. H., and Klein-Nulend, 22: 127S-30, 1998.

J. Microgravity

and bone cell mechanosensitivity.

Bone

Burger, E. H., and Klein-Nulend, J. Mechanotransduction

in bone: role of the lacuno-

canalicular network. FASEB J. 13:S101-S112,

1999.

Caillot-Augusseau,

A., Lafage-Proust, M. H., Soler, C., Pemod, J., Dubois, F., and

Alexandre, C. Bone formation and resorption biological markers in cosmonauts during

and a_er a 180-day space flight (Euromir 95). Clin. Chem. 44: 578-585, 1998.

Calvo, M. S., Eyre, D. R., and Gundberg, C. M. Molecular basis and clinical application of biological markers of bone turnover. Endocr. Rev. 17: 333-368, 1996.

Carmeliet, G., Nys, G., Stockmans, I., and Bouillon, R. Gene expression related to the differentiation of osteoblastic cells is altered by microgravity. Bone 22:139S-143S, 1998.

Chappard, D., Alexandre, C., Palle, S., Vico, L., and Morukov, B. V. Effects biphosphonate on osteoclast number during prolonged bed rest in healthy Metabolism 38: 822-825, 1989.

of a humans.

Cheng, S., Suominen, H., Era, P., and Heikkinen, E. Bone density of the calcaneus and fractures in 75- and 80-year old men and women. Osteoporos. Int. 4: 48-54, 1994.

Christenson, R. H. Biochemical markers of bone metabolism: Biochem. 30: 573-93, 1997.

an overview. Clin.

Collet, P., Uebelhart, D., Vico, L., Moro, L._ Hartmann, D., Roth, M., and Alexandre, C.

Effects of 1- and 6-month spaceflight on bone mass and biochemistry Bone 20: 547-551, 1997.

in two humans.

Cowin, S. C. On mechanosensation 1998.

in bone under microgravity. Bone 22:S119-S125,

Cummings, S. R. Are patients with hip fractures more osteoporotic? 494, 1985.

Am. J. Med. 78: 487-

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-2 i -

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Curtis, T. A., Ashrafi, S. H., and Weber, D. F. Canalicular communication of human long bones. Anat. Rec. 212: 336-344, 1985.

in the cortices

Dalsky, G. P., Stocke, K. S., Ehsani, A. A., Lee, W. C., and Birge, S. J. Weightbearing exercise training and lumbar bone mineral content in postmenopausal women. Ann. Intern. Med. 108: 824-828, 1988.

Deitrick, J. E., Whedon, G. D., Shorr, E., Toscani, V., and Davis, V. B. Effect of immobilization on metabolic and physiologic functions of normal men. Am. J. Med. 4: 3-35, 1948.

Delmas, P. D., Malaval, L., Arlot, M. E., and Meunier, P. L. Serum bone GLA-protein

compared to bone histomorphometry

in endocrine diseases. Bone 6: 339-341, 1985.

Dunston, C. R. Osteoprotegerin and osteoprotegerin ligand mediate the local regulation of bone resorption. Endocrinology 10: 18-26, 2000.

Eisman, J. A., Sambrook, P. N., Kelly, P. J., and Pocock, interaction with genetic influences in the determination Med. 91: (S5B): 5-9, 1991.

N. A. Exercise and its of bone mineral density.

Am. J.

Elffors, L. Are osteoporotic fractures due to osteoporosis? Impacts of a frailty pandemic in an aging world. Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 10: 191-204, 1998.

Ellis, J. P., Jr., Welch, B. E., and Prescott, J. M. Effects ofhypercapernia

and physical

deconditioning on musculoskeletal protein in man. Aerospace Med. 43: 22-27, 1972.

Epstein, S. Serum and urinary markers of bone remodeling: Endocr. Rev. 9: 437-449, 1988.

assessment

of bone turnover.

Eriksen, E. F., Charles, P., Melsen, F., Mosekilde, L., Risteli, L., and Risteli, J. Serum

markers of bone type I collagen formation and degradation in metabolic bone disease:

correlation with bone histomorphometry.

J. Bone. Miner Res. 8: 127-132, 1993.

Eyre, D. R., Koob, T. J., and Van Ness, K. Quantitation of hydroxypyridinium

in collagen by high-performance

liquid chromatography. Anal. Biochem.

388, 1984.

cross-links 137: 380-

Faulkner, K. G. Bone matters: are density increases necessary to reduce fracture risk? ,I. Bone Miner. Res. 15: 183-187, 2000.

Finkelstein, J. S., Mitlak, B. H., and Slovick, D. M. Osteoporosis. In Cecils Essentials in Medicine, Chap. 76, edited by T. E. Andreoli, J. C. Bennett, C. C. J. Carpenter, and F. Plum, Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 1997.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-22-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Fiore, C. E., Pennisi, P., Ciffo, F., Scebba, C., Amico, A., and Di Fazzio, S.

Immobilization-dependent

bone collagen breakdown appears to increase with time:

evidence for a lack of a new bone equilibrium in response to reduced load during

prolonged bed rest. Horm. Metab. Res. 31:31-36, 1998.

Fortney, S. M., Schneider, V. S., and Greenleaf, J. E. The physiology of bed rest. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4: Environmental Physiology, edited by M. J. Fregly and C. M. Blatteis, Oxford University Press, New York, Vol. 2, Chap. 39, 1996, pp. 889-939.

Frost, H. M. An overview: spinal tissue vital biomechanies for clinicians. In Spinal Disorders in Growth and Aging, edited by H. E. Takahashi, Springer Verlag: Tokyo, 1995, pp. 95-126.

Frost, H. M. Why do marathon runners have less bone than weight lifters? A vitalbiomechanical view and explanation. Bone 20:183-189, 1997.

Fukuoka, H., Kiriyama, M., Nishimura, Y., Higurashi, M., Suzuki, Y., and Gunji, A. Metabolic turnover of bone and peripheral monocyte release of cytokines during shortterm bed rest. Acta Physiol. Scand. 150: (Suppl 616): 37-41, 1994.

Garnero, P., and Delmas, P. D. Biochemical markers of bone turnover: applications for osteoporosis. Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am. 27: 303-323, 1998.

Gordon, J. E. Structures---or 1991.

Why Things Don't Fall Down. Penguin Books: London,

Greenleaf, J. E., and Kozlowski, S. Physiological consequences of reduced physical activity during bed rest. Exerc. Sports Sci. Rev. 20:83-119, 1982.

Grigoriev, A. I., Bugrov, S. A., Bogomolov, V. V., Egorov, A. D., Kozlovskaya, I. B., Pestov, I. D., Polyakov, V. V., and Tarasov, I. K. Medical results of the Mir year-long mission. Physiologist 34: $44-$48, 1991.

Grigoriev, A. I., Morukov, B. V., Oganov, V. S., Rakhmanov, A. S., and Buravkova, L. B. Effect of exercise and bisphosphonate on mineral balance and bone density during 360 day antiorthostatic hypokinesia. J. Bone Miner. Res. 7: 449-455, 1992.

Grigoryeva, L. S., and Kozlovskaya, I. B. Effects of weightlessness and hypokinesia on velocity and strength properties of human muscles. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Meal 21: 27-30, 1987.

Groenveld, E. H. J., and Burger, E. H. Bone morphogenetic regeneration. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 142: 9-21, 2000.

protein in human bone

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-23-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Hansson, T. H., Roos, B. O., Nachemson, A. Development ofosteopenia lumbar vertebra during prolonged bed rest after operation for scoliosis. Scand. 46: 621-636, 1975.

in the fourth Acta Orthoped.

Hearty, R. P. Osteoporotic space: an hypothesis. J. Bone Miner. Res. 6: 1-13, 1989.

Hofbauer, L. C., and Khosla, S. Androgen effects on bone metabolism: and controversies. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 140: 271-286, 1999.

recent progress

Howard, A. D., Berger, J., Familletti, P., and Udenfriend, S. Characterization

phosphatidylinositol-glycan

membrane anchor of human placental alkaline

phosphatase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84: 6055-6059, 1987.

of the

Ingrain, R. T., Clarke, B. L., Fisher, L. W., and Fitzpatrick, L. A. Distribution of

noncollagenous proteins in the matrix of adult human bone: evidence of anatomic and

functional heterogeneity. Jr. Bone Min. Res. 8:1019-1029,

1993.

Johnson, P. C., Leach, C. S., and Rambaut, P. C. Estimates of fluid and energy balances of Apollo 17. Aerospace Med. 44: 1227-1230, 1973.

Jones, D. B., Leivseth, G., and Tenbosch, J. Mechano-reception Biochem. Cell. Biol. 73: 525-534, 1995.

in osteoblast-like cells.

Kabel, J., van Rietbergen, B., Dalstra, M., Odgaard, A., and Huiskes, R. The role of an effective isotropic tissue modulus in the elastic properties of cancellous bone. J. Biomech. 32: 673-680, 1999.

Kamel, S., Brazier, M., Neff, V., Picard, C., Samson, L., Desmet, G., and Sebert, J. L.

Multiple molecular forms ofpyridinoline

cross-links excreted in human urine

evaluated by chromato.graphic and immunoassay methods. J. Bone Miner. Res. 9:

1385-1392, 1995.

Kaufman, J. J., and Einhorn, T. A. Ultrasound 8: 517-525, 1993.

assessment

of bone. J. Bone Miner. Res.

Kleerekoper, M., Villanueva, A. R., Stanciu, J., Rao, D. S., and Parfitt, A. M. The role of

three-dimensional

trabecular microstructure in the pathogenesis of vertebral

compression fractures. Calcif. Tissue Int. 37: 594-597, 1985.

Krall, E. A., and Dawson-Hughes,

B. Heritable and life-style determinants

mineral density. J. Bone Miner. Res. 8: 1-9, 1993.

of bone

Krane, S. M., Kantrowitz, F. G., Byrne, M., Pinnell, S. R., and Singer, F. R. Urinary excretion of hydroxylysine and its glycosides as an index of collagen degradation. ,1. Clin. Invest. 59: 819-827, 1977.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-24-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Krasnoff, J., and Painter, P. The physiological consequences Adv. Ren. Replace. Ther. 6: 124-132, 1999.

of bed rest and inactivity.

Krolner, B., and Toil, B. Vertebral bone loss: an unheeded side effect of therapeutic bed rest. Clin. Sci. 4: 537-540, 1983.

Krupina, T. N., Tizul, A. Y., Kuzman, M. P., and Tsyganova, N. I. Clinico-physiological changes in man during long-term antiorthostatic hypokinesia. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 16: 40-45, 1982.

LeBlanc, A. D., Schneider, V. S., Evans, H. J., Engelbretson, D. A., and Krebs, J. M. Bone mineral loss and recovery after 17 weeks of bed rest. J. Bone Miner. Res. 5: 843850, 1990.

LeBlanc, A., Schneider, V., Spector, E., Evans, H., Rowe, R., Lane, H., Demers, Lipton, A. Calcium absorption, endogenous secretion and endocrine changes and after long-term bed rest. Bone 16: 301S-304S, 1995.

L., and during

LeBlanc, A., Shackelford, L., and Schneider, V. Future human bone research in space. Bone 22: 113S-116S, 1998.

Lockwood, D. R., Vogel, J. M., Schneider, V. S., and Hulley, S. B. Effect of diphosphate EHDP on bone mineral metabolism during prolonged bed rest. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 41: 533-541, 1975.

Lutwak, L., Whedon, G. D., Lachance, P. A., Reid, J. M., and Lipscomb, H. S. Jr. Clin. Endocrinol. 29:1140-1156, 1969.

Mack, P. B., LaChance, P. A., Vose, G. P., and Vogt, F. B. Bone demineralization of foot and hand of Gemini-Titan IV, V and VII astronauts during orbital flight. Am. J. Roentgenol. Rad. Ther. Nucl. Med. 100:503-511, 1967.

Mazess, R. B., and Whedon, G. D. Immobilization 267, 1983.

and bone. Calcif. Tissue Int. 35: 265-

Miyamoto, A., Shigematsu, T., Fukunaga, T., Kawakami, K., Mukai, C., and Sekiguchi, C. Medical baseline data collection on bone and muscle change with space flight. Bone
22: 79S-82S, 1998.

Morey-Holton, E. R., Schnoes, H. K., DeLuca, H. F., Phelps, M. E., Klein, R. F., Nissenson, R. H., and Amaud, C. D. Vitamin D metabolites and bioactive parathyroid
hormone levels during Spacelab 2. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 59: 1038-1041, 1988.

Moris, M., Peretz, A., Tjeka, R., Negaban, N., Wouters, M., and Bergmann, P. Quantitative ultrasound bone measurements: normal values and comparison with bone mineral density by dual x-ray absorptiometry. Calcif. Tissue Int. 57: 6-10, 1995.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-25-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Moss, M. L. Bone as a connected cellular network: modeling and testing. In Topics in Biomechanical Engineering, edited by G. Ross, Pergamon: New York, 1991, pp. 117-119.

Mundy, G., Garrett, R., Harris, S., Chan, J., Chen, D., Rossini, G., Boyce, and Gutierrez, G. Stimulation of bone formation in vitro and in rodents
Science 286: 1946-1949, 1999.

B., Zhao, M., by statins.

Nishimura, Y., Fukuoka, H., Kiriyama, M., Suzuki, Y., Oyama, K., Ikawa, S., Higurashi, M., and Gunji, A. Bone turnover and calcium metabolism during 20 days bed rest in young healthy males and females. Acta Physiol. Scand. 150: (Suppl 616): 27-35, 1994.

Nordin, B. E. C. Calcium and osteoporosis. Nutrition 13: 664-686, 1997.

Oganov, V. S., Cann, C. E., Rakhmanov, A. S. and Ternovoy, S. K. A computer tomographic investigation of the musculoskeletal system of the spine in humans after long-term space flight. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosmich. Med. 24: 20-21, 1990.

Oganov, V. S., Rakhmanov, A. S., Novikov, V. E., Zatsepin, S. T., Rodionova, S. S., Cann, C. The state of human bone tissue during space flight. Acta Astronautica 23: 129133, 1991.

Ott, S. M. When bone mass fails to predict bone failure. Calcif. Tissue Int. 53: $7-S13, 1993.

Palle, S., Vico, L., Bourrin, S., and Alexandre, C. Bone tissue response to four-month

antiorthostatic bedrest: a bone histomorphometric

study. Calcif. Tissue Int. 51:189-194,

1992.

Palumbo, C., Palazzini, S., and Marotti, G. Morphological study of intercellular functions during osteocyte differentiation. Bone 11: 401-406, 1990.

Parfitt, A. M. Osteonal and hemiosteonal remodeling: the spatial and temporal framework for signal traffic in adult human bone. Ł Cell. Biochem. 55: 273-286, 1994.

Patel, A. N., Razzak, Z. A., and Dastur, D. K. Disuse atrophy of human skeletal muscles. Arch. Neurol. 20: 413-421, 1969.

Pinnell, S. R., Fox, R., and Krane, S. M. Human collagens: differences in glycosylated

hydroxylysines in skin and bone. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 229:119-122,

1971.

Pruitt, L. S., Jackson, R. D., Bartels, R. L., and Lehnhard, bone mineral density in early postmenopausal women. 1992.

H. J. Weight-training effects on J. Bone Miner. Res. 7:179-185,

Hinghofer-Szaikay

-26-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Raab, D. M., Crenchaw, T. D., Kimmel, D. B., and Smith, E. L. A histomorphometric

study

of the cortical bone activity during increased weight-bearing exercise. J. Bone Miner.

Res. 6: 741-749, 1991.

Rambaut, P. C., Leach, C. S., and Johnson, P. C. Calcium and phosphorus change of the Apollo 17 crew members. Nutr. Metab. 18: 62-69, 1975.
Reich, K. M., Gay, C. V., and Frangos, J. A. Fluid shear stress as a mediator of osteoblast cyclic adenosine monophosphate production. J. Cell. Physiol. 143: 100-104, 1990.
Risteli, L., and Risteli, J. Biochemical markers of bone metabolism. Ann. Med. 25: 385-393, 1993.

Roux, W. Gesammelte Abhandlung iiber die Entwicklungsmechanik Vols. I and II, W. Engelmann: Leipzig, 1895.

der Organismen.

Rubin, C. T., and Lanyon, L. E. Osteoregulatory nature of mechanical stimuli: function as a determinant for adaptive bone remodeling. J Orthop. Res. 5:300-310, 1987.

Saltin, B., Blomqvist, G., Mitchell, J. H., Johnson, R. L., Wildenthal, K., and Chapman,

C. B. Response to exercise after bed rest and after training: A longitudinal study of

adaptive changes in oxygen transport and body composition. 1968.

Circulation 38: VII-1-78,

Sargeant, A. J., Davies, C. T. M., Edwards, R. H. T., Maunder, C., and Young, A. Functional and structural changes after disuse of human muscle. Clin. Sci. Mol. Med. 52: 337-342, 1977.

Sauren, Y. M. H. F., Mieremet, R. H. P., Groot, C. G., and Scherfi, J. P. An electron

microscopic study on the presence ofproteoglycans

in the mineralized matrix of rat

and human compact lamellar bone. Anat. Rec. 232: 36-44, 1992.

Sawin, C. F. Biomedical investigations conducted in support of the extended duration orbiter medical project. Texas Med. 94: 56-68, 1998.

Schneider, V. S. Attempts to prevent bone mineral loss during prolonged bedrest. Washington, DC: NASA SP-452, 1991, 85 pp.

Schneider, V., Oganov, V., LeBlanc, A., Rakhmanov, A., Bakulin, A., Grigoriev, A., and Varonin, L. Space flight bone loss and change in fat and lean body mass. J. Bone Miner. Res. 117: S122, 1992.

Schnitzler, C. M. Bone qua!ity: a determinant Calcif. Tissue Int. 53: $27-$31,1993.

for certain risk factors for bone fragility.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-27-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Shackelford, L. C., LeBlanc, A., Feiveson, A., and Oganov, V. Bone loss in space: Shuttle/MIR experience and bed rest countermeasure program. In Proceedings of the First Biennial Space Biomedical Investigators' Workshop, NASA / USRA, 1999, p. 235.

Skerry, T. M. Mechanical loading and bone: what sort of exercise is beneficial to the skeleton? Bone 20: 179-181, 1997.

Smith, M. C. Jr., Rambaut, P. C., Vogel, J. M., and Whittle, M. W. Bone mineral

measurement--Experiment

M078. In Biomedical Results from Skylab, edited by

R. S. Johnston and L. F. Dietlein, Washington, DC: NASA SP-377, 1977, pp. 183-

190.

Smith. S. M., Nillen, J. L., Leblanc, A., Lipton, A., Demers, L. M., Lane, H. W., and Leach, C. S. Collagen cross-link excretion during space flight and bed rest. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 83: 3584-3591, 1998.

Smith, S. M., Wastney, M. E., Morukov, B.V., Larina, I. M., Nyquist, L. E., Abrams, S. A., Taran, E. N., Shih, C. Y., Nillen, J. L., Davi-Street, J. E., Rice, B. L., Lane, H. W. Calcium metabolism before, during, and after a 3-mo spaceflight: kinetic and biochemical changes. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 277: R1-R10, 1999.

Sone, T., Imai, Y., Tomomitsu, T., and Fukunaga, M. Calcaneus as a site for the assessment of bone mass. Bone 22: 155S-157S, 1998.

Takano, Y., Turner, C. H., Owan, I., Martin, R. B., Lau, S. T., Forwood, M. R., and Burr, D B. Elastic anisotropy and collagen orientation of osteonal bone are dependent on the mechanical strain distribution, or. Orthop. Res. 17: 59-66, 1999.

Tothill, P. Methods of bone mineral measurement. Physiol. Med. Biol. 34: 543-572, 1989.

Triffitt, J. T. The special proteins of bone tissue. Clin. Sci. 72: 399-408, 1987.

Turner, C. H. Site-specific skeletal effects of exercise: importance of interstitial fluid pressure. Bone 24: 161-162, 1999.

Van der Weil, Biochemical mobilization.

H. E., Lips, P., Nauta, J., Netelenbos, parameters of bone tumov'er during Bone Miner. 13: 123-129, 1991.

J. C., and Hazenberg, G. J. ten days of bed rest and subsequent

Vico, L., Chappard, D., Alexandre, C., Palle, S., Minaire, P., Riffat, G., Morukov, B., and Rakhmanov, S. Effects of a 120-day period of bed-rest on bone mass and bone cell activities in man: attempts at countermeasure. Bone Miner. 2: 383-394, 1987.

Vogel, G. Capturing the promise of youth. Science 286: 2238-2239, 1999.

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-28-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Vogel, J. M., Wasnich, R. D., and Ross, P. D. The clinical relevance of calcaneus bone mineral measurements: a review. Bone Miner. 5: 35-58, 1988.

Vogel, J. M., and Whittle, M. W. Bone mineral changes: the second manned Skylab mission. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 47: 396-400, 1976a.

Vogel, J. M., and Whittle, M. W. Bone mineral content changes in the Skylab astronauts. Am. J. Roentgenol. Rad. Ther. Nucl. Med. 126: 1296-1297, 1976b.

Vose, G. P. Review ofroentgenographic

bone demineralization studies of the Gemini space

flights. Am. J. Roentgenol. Rad. Ther. Nucl. Med. 121: 1-4, 1974.

Wang, N., Butler, J. P., and Ingber, D. E. Mechanotransduction

through the cytoskeleton. Science 260:1124-1127,

1993.

across the cell surface and

Weinbaum, S., Cowin, S. C., and Zeng, Y. A model for the excitation ofosteocytes by mechanical loading-induced bone fluid shear stresses. J Biomech. 27: 339-360, 1994.

Whedon, G. D., Lutwak, L., Reid, J., Rambaut, P., Whittle, M., Smith, M., and Leach, C. Mineral and nitrogen balance study, results of metabolic observations on Skylab II 28day orbital mission. Acta Astronautica 2: 297-309, 1975.

White, R. J. Weightlessness and the human body. Sci. Am. 279: 39-43, 1998.

Wolff, J. D. Das Gesetz der Transformation der Knochen. A. Hirschwald, Berlin, 1892.

Zerwekh, J. E., Ruml, L. A., Gottschalk, F., and Pak, C. Y. C. The effects of twelve

weeks of bed rest on bone histology, biochemical markers of bone turnover, and

calcium homeostasis 1998.

in eleven normal subjects. J. Bone Miner Res. 13:1594-1601,

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-29-

The Brittle Bones of Deconditioning

Figure captions

Figure 1. Regulation of bone formation (left) and resorption (right). Multiple plasmatic

processes, equipped with gap junctions, allow osteoblasts and osteocytes cell-cell communication within the bone matrix and mineralized compacta. Osteoblasts at bone

surface receive systemic (hormones) and local signaling substances by means of receptor

molecules, and respond to mechanical strain. These stimuli influence calcium influx or G-

protein-dependent

enzyme activity (adenylate cyclase = AC, phospholipase C = PLC) and

trigger second messenger mechanisms. Synthesis of organic bone substance ensues

bone gains stability where it is stressed most. Osteoclasts are activated by osteoblastderived cytokines and prostaglandins; after forming a ring-shaped attachment zone on the

surface, osteoclasts release hydrogen ions, proteases and phosphatases and form

Howship's-lacunae

and a matrix zone from which minerals have been dissolved. Calcium

ions stimulate retraction of osteoclast processes, calcitonin reduces osteociast motility.

Figure 2. Bone biomarkers are transported by the bloodstream, to be partly degraded by
the liver and partly excreted by the kidneys. Resorption markers: Cleavage of bone

collagen produces several compounds: hydroxyproline (HP), galactosyl hydroxylysine

(GHyl), hydroxypyridinium

cross-links (Pyr and DPyr), C- and N-telopeptides. Much of

the free HP is reabsorbed in the kidneys and oxidized in the liver; dietary HP may enter

the circulation and increase total blood level. Circulating products containing cross-links

largely vary in magnitude (few amino acids to large telopeptides). TRAP = tartrateresistant acid phosphatase. Formation markers: After having been "clipped" from procollagen-I, the carboxy- and arnio-terminal peptide ends PINP and PICP are mostly released to the bloodstream and are degraded by the liver. Osteocalcin (OC) to a large

part enters the matrix after having been formed, a small fraction escapes to the blood; renal catabolism liberates free carboxyglutamic acid (Gla) and Gla-peptides into the urine. Bone alkaline phosphatase (ALP) derives from active osteoblasts.

Figure 3. Time-course of changes during bed-rest deconditioning. Inset: Incorrect

posture -- maximum head inclination 30 °, legs must not be elevated above horizontal.

calc = bone mineral density in calcaneus; DPyr = urinary deoxypyridinoline

cross-link

excretion; e. os. s. -- extent of osteiod surface; HP = urinary hydroxyproline excretion;

ICTP = serum type I C-telopeptide concentration; NTX = urinary N-telopeptide

excretion; P = serum phosphate concentration and urinary phosphate excretion; PTH =

serum parathormone concentration; Pyr = urinary pyridinoline cross-link excretion; sCa = serum calcium concentration; tr. re. s. = trabecular resorption surface; uCa = urinary

calcium excretion; tib /fem/ sp = bone mineral density in tibia, femur, and spine; 1,25D = serum vitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] concentration. (From Amaud et al., 1992; Fiore et aL,

1998; Leblanc et al., 1990; Palle et al., 1992; Smith et al., 1998; Van der Weil et al.,

1991; Vico et al., 1987; Zerwekh et al., 1998.)

Hinghofer-Szalkay

-30-

Capillary

Hormones

Signaling substances

q
AC

Ca ++
J

Osteoblast

Osteocyte

Interstitial space

Mechanical strain

Bone surface-

Matrix

Osteocyte

Howship's lacuna-_ _eralized bone
Matrix zone

. ° H_

Calcite Osteoclast

Ca s (PO4) 3 OH 2

Hinghofer

Fig. 1.1

/
\
!

tP i

+200% ;0-120%

wk 1-2

,40-60%

20-40°/0

HP NTX
uCa

:+10%

P Pyr

: +2%

sCa

I.
-2-4%

:-10%

5-40% ! L-50%

1,2SD

wk 3-4

wk 5.8

NTX
D,P_r nrlCTP uP_nr
P sCa

HP NTX
DPyr ICTP uPCyar
P sCa

1F_2T5D

1_2%D'

wk 9-12
ICTP NTX Pyr uCa
P sCa
1_2%D

4 mo
ICTP DPyr tr. re. s.

6 mo, ICTP DPyr
Pyr

Tib/fen'Vsp Calc
e. OS.S.

Hinghofer

Fig. 1.3

7. BED REST MUSCULAR

ATROPHY

John E. Greenleaf*

For if the whole body is rested much more than is usual,

there is no immediate increase in strength. In fact, should a

long period of inactivity be followed by a sudden return to

exercise, there will be an obvious deterioration .... The same

is true of the teeth and of the eyes, and in fact of every part

of the body.

HIPPOCRATES

INTRODUCTION

A major debilitating response from prolonged bed rest (BR) is muscle atrophy, defined as a "decrease in size of a part of tissue after full development has been attained: a wasting away of tissue as from disuse, old age, injury or disease" (Webster's New Intemational Dictionary, 3rd ed., 1986, s.v. "muscle atrophy"). Part of the complicated mechanism for the dizziness, increased body instability, and exaggerated gait in patients who arise immediately after BR may be a result of not only foot pain, but also of muscular atrophy and associated reduction in lower limb strength. Also, there seems to be a close association between muscle atrophy and bone atrophy (Hinghofer-Szalkay chapter, Rodahl et al., 1967). A discussion of many facets of the total BR homeostatic syndrome has been published (Fortney, Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1996).
The old adage that use determines form which promotes function of bone (Wolff's law) also applies to those people exposed to prolonged BR (without exercise training) in whom muscle atrophy is a consistent finding (Fortney, Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1996; LeBlanc et al., 1992). An extreme case involved a 16-year-old boy who was ordered to bed by his mother in 1932: after 50 years in bed he had "a lily-white frame with limbs as thin as the legs of a ladder-back chair" (Associated Press, 1982). These findings emphasize the close relationship between muscle atrophy and bone atrophy (Fortney, Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1966; LeBlanc et al., 1997; Treharne, 1981). In addition to loss of muscle mass during deconditioning, there is a significant loss of muscle strength and a decrease in protein synthesis. Because the decreases in force (strength) are proportionately greater than those in fiber size or muscle cross-sectional area (Berg et al., 1991), other contributory factors must be involved; muscle fiber dehydration may be important (Bosco, Terjung, and Greenleaf, 1968).

'Laboratory for Human Environmental Moffett Field, Califomia

Physiology, NASA, Ames Research Center,

BedRestMuscular Atrophy

Macro-Atrophy

The extensor muscles that extend a joint in ambulatory people are used to

maintain the upright (sitting or standing) posture to counteract the force of gravity. Some

such back muscles are located in the posterior trunk (semispinalis, longissimus,

iliocostalis), anterior thigh (knee extensors-quadriceps

femoris), and posterior leg (ankle

extensors-soleus,

gastrocnemius). A decrease in muscle mass in those groups during

deconditioning,

as measured from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sections, occurs in

both flexor and extensor muscles: by 8% in the calf after 24 hr ofBR (Conley et al.,

1996), by 3% within the first 7 days ofBR (Ferrando et al., 1995), by 5% within 14 days

ofBR (LeBlanc et al., 1992), by 5% to 10% by 20-28 days ofBR (Akima et al., 1997;

Greenleaf et al., 1994b); muscle mass continues to decline thereafter to 112 days of BR

(Fig. 1). In general, the rate of decrease in muscle mass by 35 days of BR is greater than

that to 112 days of BR in the trunk, thigh, and leg. Also, circumferences of the arm,

chest, waist, thigh, and calf decrease by 0.1% to 3.4% during BR from 9 to 252 days

(Greenleaf and Kozlowski, 1982); loss of fat and water from muscle likely contribute to

this volume contraction (LeBlanc et al., 1987).

Magnetic resonance imaging (MR/) is useful for measuring the changes in muscle

size and composition that accompany BR deconditioning. In addition to loss of fat and

water, the contrast in MR images arises from many other factors such as concentration

and conformation ofmacromolecules.

Typical MR images used to estimate changes in

muscle volume are designated T 1 --weighted

as brightness of the image intensity-

which is inversely related to the T1 relaxation time of the signal and characterizes the

exponential rate of recovery of the magnetization induced by placing tissue in a magnetic

field. A second MR] parameter (T2) characterizes the rate of decay of the MR signal; it is

particularly sensitive to and generally increases in proportion to tissue water content. T1 relaxation is transfer of energy to adjacent nuclei and similar resonant frequencies, whereas T2 relaxation involves interaction between excited nuclei and magnetic fields

with no energy loss, thereby increasing the probability of such interactions and shorter relaxation times (Adams, Duvoisin, and Dudley, 1992). To the extent that response of

proton [H ÷] T2 relaxation times reflect fluid shifts from water bound to the shell of

macromolecules

and those of free unbound water (Fullerton, Potter, and Dornbluth,

1982), it is surprising that MRI scans indicate that the decrease in limb muscle crosssectional areas, thus their volume is not caused at least in part by fluid loss. Both LeBlanc

et al. (1986) and Conley et al. (1996) repo_e_d no significant change in T2 values from

resting leg muscle MRI scans during deconditioning in rats and humans. These findings are difficult to reconcile with the well-established decreases in total body water, plasma volume, and limb size and muscle Volume _tha_:occur with prolonged BR (Fortney,

Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1996) (since striated muscle is about 80% water). Adams et al.

(1992) have reported that T2 is increased as a function of exercise load, and that the increase in muscle volume during exercise is mainly a result of influx and binding of

water. If this is so, why is there not efflux of water from muscle during deconditioning?

Greenleaf, John E

-2-

Bed Rest Muscular Atrophy
Thus, this macro-muscle atrophy begins within the first few days of BR in the absence of exercise training and reaches 20% to 30% by 17 weeks, in both flexor and especially extensor leg muscles.

Muscular Strength

Maximal static and isokinetic muscular strengths decrease in virtually every major

muscle group from the first week of BR without remedial exercise training (Bloomfield, 1997; Greenleaf et al., 1983; Krasnoff and Painter, 1999). Static maximal strength losses

can be 5% to 9% (upper extremities) and 1% to 14% (lower extremities) during 44 days

of BR, but they continue decreasing to 26% to 48% (upper) and 36% to 58% (lower) from 63 days to 95 days of BR (Fig. 2). In addition to significant loss of contractile

function because of muscle atrophy, it may be more difficult "psychologically"

to

increase the tension to perform a maximal strength test after extended BR deconditioning,

so the actual losses with prolonged BR could even be greater.

Maximal isokinetic muscular strength does not decrease in all major muscle

groups during BR without remedial exercise; the decrements seem to be localized in the lower extremities (Greenleaf et al., 1994a; LeBlanc et al., 1992). LeBlanc et al. (1992)

found that isokinetic strength (performed at a velocity of60°.sec l) decreased

progressively over 112 days of BR (Fig. 3): more so in the thighs and legs (from 11% to

31%) than in the arms (from +4% to -6%), and more so during the first 35 days (from

10% to 25%) than at 112 days where the additional lower extremity losses increased by

only 1% to 8%. Greenleaf et al. (1994a) partially confirmed these findings in five men

over 26 days of BR where there was no significant change in peak torque (100°.sec -I) for

shoulder abduction and adduction, but significant decrease in knee flexion strength.

Isotonic aerobic exercise training and isokinetic strength training daily during 28 days of

BR (Fig. 4) resulted in no change or increases, respectively, in peak torque for right knee extension when compared with the progressively decreasing torque with no exercise

training (Greenleaf et al., 1989). B amman et al. (1997) also reported complete restoration

of plantar flexor angle-specific torque and average power at all velocities after 14 days of

6 ° head-down BR with multi-set, constant resistance, concentric/eccentric

plantar

flexion-extension work to fatigue. Also, strength losses were similar for eccentric

(lengthening) and concentric (shortening) muscle actions that were independent of contraction velocity, suggesting that selective atrophy of specific fiber types did not

occur (Dudley et al., 1989).

Thus, in contrast to the general decrease in static strength in both upper and lower extremity muscle groups, these isokinetic strength responses were of lesser magnitude and the decrements were located mainly in muscles of the lower extremities. Compared with ambulatory muscular deconditioning, there is a greater loss in both static and dynamic strength in relation to muscle cross-sectional area or volume during BR. Perhaps this discrepancy results in part from the preferential loss of water from deconditioned muscles.

Greenleaf, John E

-3-

BedRestMuscularAtrophy

Micro-Atrophy

The decrease in gross muscle size during prolonged BR is a reflection of muscle water content, as well as other cellular events in its fat, connective tissue, and fiber content, the latter being the more pliable. The more frequently studied muscles are the soleus (an ankle plantar flexor) and the vastus lateralis (a knee extensor) -- those that help maintain the erect posture and also respond more readily to deconditioning.

After 17 days of 6 ° head-down BR the soleus muscle fibers (slow Type I myosin heavy chain, MHC) in men exhibited a significant decrease in peak isometric force (P0) of 11% to 13% (Widrick et al., 1997, 1998); also, Type I fiber unloaded shortening velocity (V0) at peak power output was increased by 13% to 34%. Thus, the increased velocity facilitates maintenance of power (force x velocity) as atrophy reduces force (Riley et al., 1998). Fiber-packing density of the thick myofilaments was unchanged with BR, but thin-filament (actin) density was decreased by 16% to 24% (Riley et al., 1998; Widrick et al., 1997). The correlation (r 2) between increased Vo and decreased thinfilament density was 0.62; a 1% decrease in filament density increased V0 by about 10% (Riley et al., 1998). These findings lead to the hypothesis that changes in the geometry between thick and thin filaments may be associated with the elevated V0, because fewer filaments would increase interfilament spacing resulting in earlier cross-bridge detachment, thereby increasing velocity.

In general, the vastus lateralis muscle responds similarly to the soleus even after

somewhat longer periods (37 days to 42 days) of BR deconditioning. The specific tension

ratio (Po/cross-sectional

area, CSA) decreased by 32% to 48%, and was associated with

decreased myofibrillar protein content, which is primarily related to a decreased number

of force-generating cross-bridges (Larsson et al., 1996). The 13% decrease in CSA

increased the Po/CSA ratio which should be considered when compared with only the Po

values cited previously for the soleus muscle. The V0 in Type I MHC isoforms decreased

by 49% in two of three subjects and was associated with changes in myosin light chain

isoform composition. Andersen et al. (1999) have reported altered MHC gene expression

leading to unusual combinations ofmRNA and MHC isoforms, but there were no

commensurate changes to the protein level alone, suggesting an increased number of

muscle fibers in a transitional state. Observation of gross structural anatomy of muscle

after 30 days of BR in men (Hikida et al., 1989) and 5 months of close confinement in

male mongrel dogs (Nazar et al., 1993) reveals similar fiber disorganization,

degeneration, and decreased mitochondrial density, which must contribute to decreased

muscular function. Essentially all of the latter anatomical aberrations were restored to

normal after the dogs were released from confinement.

Proprioceptive Reflexes and Limb Tracking
Proprioceptive reflexes (from recorded bioelectric activity of latent periods) and muscle tone were measured in six young men after 62 days of horizontal BR without and with 1,100 kcal.day 1 of physical exercise (Cherepakhin, 1968). Although muscle tone

Greenleaf, John E

-4-

f_
Bed Rest Muscular Atrophy

decreased during the no-exercise phase, there were no significant changes in the mandibular, biceps, triceps, shoulder, knee, or Achilles reflexes in either the exercise or nonexercise phases: duration of the reflex latent periods was proportional to path length; for example, mandibular was 5 msec and Achilles was 34 msec.

Another facet ofproprioception was measured in 19 mer}---36 + 24 yr, with no

exercise (NOE) and isotonic (ITE) and isokinetic (IKE) leg exercise training during BR

-- after 30 days of-6 ° head-down BR (Bemauer et al., 1994). Only the IKE group

performed proprioceptive training (1 min of leg tracking while viewing a vertically

oscillating bar on a biofeedback computer screen) daily during BR; the NOE and ITE

groups performed the tracking test only weekly. Aider BR, there were no significant changes in tracking with NOE, but there were significant increases in the two exercise

groups (ITE and IKE). Thus, 30 days ofBR deconditioning compromise these proprioceptive reflexes or leg tracking.

does not appear to

Postural Control after Bed Rest

Ambulation and maintenance of body balance are usually impaired after

prolonged BR (Davis, Horwood, and De Jong, 1997; Gretebeck and Greenleaf, 1999;

Haines, 1974). Upon standing alter BR there is usually pain from the plantar foot, in the

lower limb joints, and in muscles, especially those in the upper back and neck (Haines,

1974); enhanced postural instability measured by increased electromyographic

activity

(Davis, Horwood, and De Jong, 1997); and impaired rail walking and balance (especially

with eyes open) compounded by increased pre-syncopal episodes (Gretebeck and

Greenleaf, 1999; Haines, 1974). Daily isotonic or isometric exercise training during BR,

with increased leg extension strength (Greenleaf et al., 1989) and unchanged or increased

proprioception tracking (Bemauer et al., 1994) did not influence or ameliorate this

impaired postural ambulation or control after BR.

Recovery of postural control after BR occurs after 3-4 days of ambulation, and balance test results return to normal faster with eyes open (Haines, 1974). Pre-syncopal signs and symptoms (tendency to faint with decreased cerebral blood flow) may be involved (Drozdova and Nesterenko, 1969).

Greenleaf, John E

-5-

BedRestMuscular Atrophy

REFERENCES

Adams, G. R., Duvoisin,
electromyography 1992.

M. R., and Dudley, G. A. Magnetic resonance as indexes of muscle function. Jr. Appl. Physiol.

imaging and 73:1578-1583,

Akima, H., Kuno, S., Suzuki, Y., Gunji, A., and Fukunaga, T. Effects of 20 days of bed rest on physiological cross-sectional area of human thigh and leg muscles evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging. J. Gravit. Physiol. 4: S 15-$21, 1997.

Andersen, J. L., Gruschy-Knudsen,

T., Sandri, C., Larsson, L., and Schiaffino, S. Bed rest

increases the amount of mismatched fibers in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl.

Physiol. 86: 455-460, 1999.

Associated Press. Puzzling illness keeps man in bed 50 years. San Jose Mercury News, May 26, 1982, p. 12A.

Bamman, M. M., Hunter, G. R., Stevens, B. R., Guilliams, M. E., and Greenisen, M. C. Resistance exercise prevents plantar flexor deconditioning during bed rest. Med Sci. Sports Exerc. 29: 1462-1468, 1997.

Berg, H. E., Dudley, limb unloading 70: 1882-1885,

G. A., H_iggmark, T., Ohlsen, H., and Tesch, P. A. Effects of lower on skeletal muscle mass and function in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 1991.

Bemauer, E. M., Walby, W. F., Ertl, A. C., Dempster, P. T., Bond, M., and Greenleaf, J. E.

Knee-joint proprioception during 30-day 6 ° head-down bed rest with isotonic and

isokinetic exercise training. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 65:1110-1115,

1994.

Bloomfield, S. A. Changes in musculoskeletal structure and function with prolonged bed rest. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 29: 197-206, 1997.
Bosco, J. S., Terjung, R. L., and Greenleaf, J. E. Effects of progressive hypohydration on maximal isometric muscular strength. J. Sports Med. Phys. Fitness 8: 81-86, 1968.
Cherepakin, M. A. Effect of prolonged bed rest on muscle tone and proprioceptive reflexes in man. Kosm. Biol. Med. 2: 43-47, 1968.

Conley, M. S., Foley, J. M., Ploutz-Snyder, L. L., Meyer, R. A., and Dudley, G.A. Effect of acute head-down tilt on skeletal muscle cross-sectional area and proton transverse relaxation time. J. Appl. Physiol. 81: 1572-1577, 1996.
Davis, J. E., Horwood, K. E., and DeJong, G. K. Effects of exercise during head-down bed rest on postural control. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 68: 392-395, 1997.

Greenleaf, John E

-6-

Bed Rest Muscular Atrophy

Drozdova, N. T., and Nesterenko, O. N. State of visual analyzer during hypodynamia. In Problemy Kosmicheskoy Biologii, edited by A. M. Genin and P. A. Sorokin, Nauka Press: Moscow, 13: 189-191, 1969.

Dudley, G. A., Duvoisin, M. R., Convertino, V. A., and Buchanan, P. Alterations of the in vivo torque-velocity relationship of human skeletal muscle following 30 days exposure to simulated microgravity. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 60: 659-663, 1989.

Ellis S., Kirby, L. C., and Greenleaf, J. E. Lower extremity muscle thickness during 30-

day 6 ° head-down bed rest with isotonic and isokinetic exercise training. Aviat.

Space Environ. Med. 64:1011-1015,

1993.

Ferrando, A. A., Stuart, C. A., Brunder, D. G., and Hillman, G. R. Magnetic resonance imaging quantitation of changes in muscle volume during 7 days of strict bed rest. Aviat. Space. Environ. Med. 66: 976-981, 1995.

Fortney, S. M., Schneider, V. S., and Greenleaf, J. E. The physiology Handbook of Physiology: Section 4: Environmental Physiology, Fregly and C. M. Blatteis, Oxford University Press: New York, 1996, pp. 889-939.

of bed rest. In edited by M. J. Vol. 2, Chap. 39,

Fullerton, G. D., Potter, J. L., and Dornbluth, N. C. NMR relaxation of protons in tissues and other macromolecular water solutions. Magn. Reson. Imaging 1: 209-228, 1982.

Greenleaf, J. E., Bernauer, E. M., Ertl, A. C., Bulbulian, R., and Bond, M. Isokinetic strength and endurance during 30-day 6° head-down bed rest with isotonic and isokinetic exercise training. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 65: 45-50, 1994a.

Greenleaf, J. E., Bernauer, E. M., Ertl, A. C., Trowbridge, T. S., and Wade, C. E. Work capacity during 30 days of bed rest with isotonic and isokinetic exercise training. J Appl. Physiol. 67: 1820-1826, 1989.

Greenleaf, J. E., and Kozlowski, S. Physiological consequences of reduced physical activity during bed rest. In Exerc. Sport. Sci. Rev. 10, edited by R. L. Terjung, Franklin Institute Press: Philadelphia, PA, 1982, pp. 84-119.

Greenleaf, J. E., Lee, P. L., Ellis, S., Selzer, R. H., and Ortendahl, D. A. Leg muscle volume during 30-day 6-degree head-down bed rest with isotonic and isokinetic exercise training. Moffett Field, CA, NASA TM-4580, 1994b, 8 pp.

Greenleaf, J. E, Van Beaumont, W., Convertino, V. A., and Starr, J. C. Handgrip and general muscular strength and endurance during prolonged bed rest with isometric and isotonic leg exercise training. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 54: 696-700, 1983.

Greenleaf, John E

-7-

Bed Rest Muscular Atrophy

Gretebeck, R. J., and Greenleaf, J. E. Utility of ground-based simulations of weightlessness. In Nutrition in Space Flight and Weightlessness Models, edited by H. W. Lane and D. A. Schoeller, CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2000, pp. 69-96.

Haines, R. F. Effect of bed rest and exercise on body balance. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 36: 323327, 1974.

Hikida, R. S., Gollnick, P. D., Dudley, G. A., Convertino, V. A., and Buchanan, P. Structural and metabolic characteristics of human skeletal muscle following 30 days of simulated microgravity. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 60: 664-670, 1989.

Krasnoff, J., and Painter, P. The physiological consequences Adv. Ren. Replace. Ther. 6: 124-132, 1999.

of bed rest and inactivity.

Larsson, L., Li, X., Berg, H. E., and Frontera, W. R. Effects of removal of weight-bearing function on contractility and myosin isoform composition in simple human skeletal muscle cells. Pflfigers Arch. 432: 320-328, 1996.
LeBlanc, A., Evans, H., Schonfeld, E., Ford, J., Marsh, C., Schneider, V., and Johnson, P. Relaxation times of normal and atrophied muscle. Med. Phys. 13:514-517, 1986.

LeBlanc, A., Evans, H., Schonfeld, E., Ford, J., Schneider, V., Jhingran, S., and Johnson, P. Changes in nuclear magnetic resonance (T2) relaxation of limb tissue with bed rest. Magn. Reson. Med. 4: 487-492, 1987.
LeBlanc, A., Rowe, R., Evans, H., West, S., Shackelford, L., and Schneider, V. Muscle atrophy during long duration bed rest. lnt. J. Sports Med. 18: $283-$334, 1997.

LeBlanc, A. D., Schneider, V. S., Evans, H. J., Pientok, C., Rowe, R., and Spector, E. Regional changes in muscle mass following 17 weeks of bed rest. J. Appl. Physiol. 73: 2172-2178, 1992.

Nazar, K., Greenleaf, J. E., Philpott, D., Pohoska, E., Olszewska, K., and KaciubaUscilko, H. Muscle mitochondrial density after exhaustive exercise in dogs: prolonged restricted activity and retraining. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 64: 306313, 1993.

Riley, D. A., Bain, J. L. W., Thompson, J. L., Fitts, R. H., Widrick, J. J., Trappe, S. W.,

Trappe, T. A., and Costill, D. L. Disproportionate loss of thin filaments in human

soleus muscle alter 17-day bed rest. Muscle Nerve 21:1280-1289,

1998.

Greenleaf, John E

-8-

Bed Rest Muscular Atrophy

Rodahl, K., Birkhead, N. C., Blizzard, J. J., Issekutz, B. Jr, and Pruett, E. D. R. Physiological changes during prolonged bed rest. In Nutrition and Physical Activity, edited by G. Blix, Almqvist & Wiksells: Uppsala, Sweden, 1967, pp. 107-113.

Treharne, R. W. Review of Wolff's law and its proposed means of operation. Rev. 10: 35-47, 1981.

Orthop.

Widrick, J. J., Norenberg, K. M., Romatowski, J. G., Blaser, C. A., Karkanek, M., Sherwood, J., Trappe, S.W., Trappe, T. A., Costill, D. L., and Fitts, R. H. Forcevelocity-power and force-pCa relationships of human soleus fibers atter 17 days of bed rest. J Appl. Physiol. 85: 1949-1956, 1998.
Widrick, J. J., Romatowski, J. G., Bain, J. L. W., Trappe, S. W., Trappe, T. A., Thompson, J. L., Costill, D. L., Riley, D. A., and Fitts, R. H. Effect of 17 days of bed rest on peak isometric force and unloaded shortening velocity of human soleus fibers. Am. J Physiol. Cell Physiol. 273: C1690-C1699, 1997.

Yeremin, A. V., Bazhanov, V. V., Marishchuk, V. L., Stepantsov, V. I., and Dzhamgarov, T. T. Physical conditioning for man under conditions of prolonged hypodynamia. In Problemy Kosmicheskoy Biologii, edited by A. M. Genin and P. A. Sorokin, Nauka Press: Moscow 13: 192-199, 1969.

Greenleaf, John E

-9-

BedRestMuscularAtrophy
Figure captions
Figure 1. Mean percent changes in muscle mass from the trunk, thigh, and leg at 28-35 days and 119 days of BR. (From: LeBlanc et al., 1992, 1997 magnetic resonance imaging-pixels; Ellis, Kirby, and Greenleaf, 1993 ultrasound-cm).
Figure 2. Mean percent changes in maximal (static) muscular strength during 7 days to 44 days and 63 days to 95 days of BR. (From Greenleaf et al., 1983; 63-95 day data from Yeremin et al., 1969.)
Figure 3. Mean percent changes in isokinetic (dynamic) muscular strength at 60°-sec _ after 35 days and 112 days of BR (* p<0.05 from zero) (From LeBlanc et al., 1992.)
Figure 4. Mean (+SE) percent changes in peak torque for right knee extension during 29 days of-6 ° head-down BR in three groups. (From Greenleaf et al., 1989.)

Greenleaf, John E

- 10-

i_

6el "1SOd
6el "luv
q6!ql "lSOd

·_o,_ __,

_un_=,,

·]u'ff _

I

i

o

o

__
_,

i

i

o

o

% 'e6ueqo

! ,,,-.,

6;)1 "1SOd
6;)1 "IuV
q6!q.L

uatuopqv

N:)e8

uJJe
aJO=l
tuJ_ JaddN
d!J6 -pueH

U)
m'O 'ID
I I
rll

I

I

I

I

J

O

O

,.;-,

% 'a6ueqo

"Xel,I JelUeld
ePlUV
"Xel# !sJop el>luv
-lxe oeu)l

U_'v-
01

I

I

I

I

0

O

O

0

"F

% 'e6ueqo

J .J ) ,_/i#"/ t j.]:p,_

I
!

GO IU
If
II
,r= ˘%1 (11
llO I,CO
˘3
-t-

Z

II Ili U

˘3

_X

_'_ "uu'_
0 00
z____
[1_11

I

I

u'_ 0 0,1 IN

I

]

!

I

I

I

I

LI_ 0

,r-

,_

0

in

% 'anbJOl Head Ul aEueqo

÷-

lU

.-! C

D

.0 0

I

_

in

" _r

8. BED REST

AND ORTHOSTATIC-HYPOTENSIVE INTOLERANCE

Suzanne M. Schneider*

Teach us to live that we may dread unnecessary time in bed,
Get people up and we may save our patients from an early grave.
R. A. J. ASHER

RESPONSE VERSUS TOLERANCE

Orthostatic tolerance may be defined as the ability of humans to maintain cerebral perfusion and consciousness upon movement from a supine or sitting position to the upright posture; for example, subjects can stand suddenly or be tilted to the head-up body position. Similar but not identical physiological responses can be induced by positive Gz (head to foot) acceleration or exposure to lower body negative pressure (LBNP). The objective is to suddenly shift blood to the lower body to determine how effectively cardiovascular and neural-hormonal compensatory responses react to maintain blood pressure. In the most precise method for measuring tolerance, individuals would be stressed until they faint (syncope). However, the potential consequences and discomforts of such a test usually prohibit such a procedure so that few investigators actually induce syncope. In a more common approach, subjects are exposed to a given level of stress, for example, head-up tilt for 15 min, and any increases in heart rate or decreases in blood pressure are interpreted as indicators of progress toward syncope. Presumably, the greater the perturbation of heart rate and blood pressure, the closer to "tolerance," i.e., point of unconsciousness.

Another more appropriate approach is to induce a progressively increasing

hypotensive stress until pre-determined physiological responses or pre-syncopal

symptoms appear. The physiological criteria may include a sudden drop in systolic blood

pressure (> 25 mm.minl), a sudden drop in heart rate (> 15 beats.min'l), or a systolic

blood pressure < 70 mmHg. The most common pre-syncopal symptoms include lightheadedness, stomach awareness or distress, feelings of warmth, tingly skin, and light to

profuse sweating. Usually a combination of physiological responses and symptoms occurs such that, on different days, the tolerance time to the same orthostatic protocol is

reproducible for a given individual. The assumption fainting, one can determine their tolerance.

is that by taking subjects to near

*Research Physiologist, Houston, Texas

Exercise Physiology Laboratory, NASA, Johnson Space Center,

BedRestandOrthostatic-HypotensiveIntolerance
This latter pre-syncopaal pproachis betterfor estimatingorthostaticor hypotensivetolerancethanthe formermeasuremenotf heartrateandblood pressure responsetso a given stress. Thereis considerablevariability in individual responsesto orthostasis. For example,somesubjectsare"heart-rateresponders"andhavea pronouncedcardiovascularesponsesimilar to thatwhenperformingmoderatelyhard aerobicexercise,whereasothersmay experiencepre-syncopasl ymptomswith very little increasein heartrate. Someindividualshavea slow,gradualfall in blood pressureto orthostasisa, ndothershavelittle changein bloodpressureuntil a suddenprecipitousfall in pressureoccursjust prior to fainting. With both tilt andLBNP teststhereis a low correlationbetweenheart-rateor blood-pressureresponsetso a sub-tolerancestressasa measureofpre-syncopallimited orthostatic-hypotensivteolerance(Fortney,Schneider, andGreenleaf,1996).

ORTHOSTATIC AND HYPOTENSIVE

TOLERANCE AFTER BED REST

Duration of Bed Rest

Orthostatic tolerance decreases following even brief exposure (1-4 hr) to

horizontal or head-down bed rest (BR) (Butler et al., 1991; Shi et al., 1992; Vogt, 1967;

Pannier et al., 1991). Vogt (1967) found reduced head-up tilt (HUT) tolerance (time to

pre-syncope), greater increases in heart rate, and a faster decline in blood pressure after

only 12 hr of recumbency. After 2 weeks of BR, the increase in heart rate upon standing was almost double that seen before BR, and the fall in stroke volume and cardiac output

was twice as great (Harper and Lyles, 1988). The degree of intolerance with BR,

however, does not appear to be a function of the length of the recumbency.

In a 17-week

horizontal BR study in which weekly graded LBNP tests were used, marked changes in the hypotensive response occurred after the first week, with no further significant change

during the remaining 16 weeks (Lathers and Charles, 1993).

Although deterioration in orthostatic tolerance may occur rapidly, the mechanisms

responsible may not remain the same throughout prolonged BR. For example, simply

replacing body fluids during the first week may be an effective treatment (Hyatt and

West, 1977). However, as BR continues, additional mechanisms such as loss of ability

to vasoeonstrict tolerance.

or increased heart rate may become significant factors compromising

Chair Rest, Hypodynamia, Confined Environments
Orthostatic tolerance is impaired during decreasing levels of physical activity, even without reduction in the hydrostatic gradient in the body. Prolonged sitting or other reduction in activity may result in increased blood pooling in the lower body or delay in the onset of vasoactive reflexes. Increased orthostatic intolerance occurred in subjects who were exposed to prolonged sitting (Convertino, 1991; Sullivan et al., 1985), in

Schneider, Suzanne

-2-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

subjects who reduced their daily activities sufficiently to reduce their aerobic capacity

(Raven, Welch-O'Connor,

and Shi, 1998), and in ambulatory subjects living in a confined

environment (Lamb et al., 1964). Conversely, brief periods of upright sitting exercise

during an extended BR deconditioning period may improve orthostatic-hypotensive

responses, but usually did not completely restore tolerance to pre-BR levels (Birkhead et al., 1964; Watenpaugh et al., 1994). However, supine exercise training without

simultaneous orthostatic stress was not effective in maintaining orthostatic tolerance

(Birkhead et al., 1966; Greenleaf, Wade, and Leftheriotis, 1989).

Men versus Women
It has been reported that women have lower orthostatic tolerance than men (Hordinsky et al., 1981; Montgomery et al., 1977) despite considerable data suggesting that there are no sex differences (Frey and Hoffier, 1988; Frey, Mathes, and Hoffler, 1986; Rahman et al., 1991). Part of the discrepancy may derive from the great variations in tolerance that exist among men and among women. Because of these wide ranges of tolerance in both sexes it appears that any sex-related differences would likely be small. Conclusive proof of such differences would require testing of an impractically large number of subjects.
Even if sex differences do exist, they may be present only during certain phases of the menstrual cycle in women. One hypothesis is that estrogens reduce vascular tone (Altura, 1975; Von Eiffet aI., 1971) which could lead to greater peripheral blood flow or to less effective vasoconstrictor responses during ovulatory and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle (Hassan, Carter, and Tooke, 1990). Presumably this greater peripheral vasodilation could facilitate lower orthostatic tolerance.
Another difficulty in comparing male and female responses to orthostasis is that different compensatory mechanisms may be used to maintain blood pressure. Women have been reported to have lower resting blood pressures, to have higher cutaneous blood flow, and to respond to orthostasis by increasing heart rate to a greater extent than men (Frey, Mathes, and Homer, 1986; Vernikos et al., 1993). On the other hand, men generally have higher vasoconstrictor tone and increased central blood volume, and respond to orthostasis more by increasing vasoconstrictor tone with an attenuated heartrate response than do women (Montgomery et al., 1977). If women tend to be heart-rate responders, and if the change in heart-rate to a given orthostatic stress is used to estimate orthostatic tolerance, then it may appear that women have lower orthostatic tolerance. These generalities, however, apply to large populations and there is great overlap in individual responses.

Schneider, Suzanne

-3-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

POTENTIAL MECHANISMS

FOR ORTHOSTATIC

INTOLERANCE

AFTER BED REST

AND HYPOTENSIVE

Orthostatic tolerance depends on appropriate interactions between the neural, hormonal, and endocrine systems. During prolonged BR, these varying mechanisms may contribute to orthostatic intolerance depending on the length of BR exposure; this will further complicate the task of devising effective treatments. Discussed below are some of the possible mechanisms that contribute to orthostatic and hypotensive intolerance during BR.

Body Fluid Losses
One early response to even short BR is a loss of body water. Presumably the cephalic shift of fluids into the thoracic region stimulates atrial receptors resulting in peripheral vasodilation, increased renal perfusion, and increased urine loss (Gauer and Henry, 1963). However, Gilmore and Zucker (1978) have questioned the importance of this "Henry-Gauer reflex" for upright primates such as man. Norsk (1996) suggests that the fluid loss at the onset of BR is caused instead by changes in arterial baroreflex function. The diuresis during the first several hours of BR may be accompanied by reduced voluntary fluid intake thereby also contributing to the early negative fluid balance (Greenleaf, 1989).
This negative fluid balance results in an ultimate loss of plasma volume. Upon abruptly assuming the horizontal or head-down position there is an initial 6%-7% expansion of plasma volume for about 1-2 hr followed immediately by a reduction after about 4 hr (Greenleaf, 1989). Thereafter, plasma volume decreases by about 20% until a new lower steady state is approached after about 30 days (Greenleafet al., 1977). During short-term (< 1 week) BR, the decrease in orthostatic response is proportional to the hypovolemia, and restoration of plasma volume improves orthostatic function (Gaffney et aL, 1985; Hyatt and West, 1977).
With increasing duration of BR (> 1 week), the simple restoration of body fluids becomes progressively less effective for improving orthostatic responses. Following 14 days of BR, rehydration with a hypertonic salt solution improved acceleration tolerance to 2.1 +Gz in eight men (Greenleafet al., 1973), but following 30 days of BR, performance of isotonic exercise training twice daily during BR maintained plasma volume, but did not improve tilt-tolerance in seven men (Greenleaf, Wade, and Leftheriotis, 1989).

Carotid-Cardiac

Baroreceptor Function

When arterial blood pressure falls suddenly, carotid sinus and aortic arch baroreceptors are stimulated to increase the heart rate and initiate peripheral

Schneider, Suzanne

-4-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

vasoconstriction.

The heart-rate response of the carotid baroreflex is characterized by a

sigmoid-shaped curve; the slope and range of the curve are indicators of the ability of this

reflex to compensate for a drop in blood pressure (Fig. 1). After 10-12 days of BR this

baroreflex curve is altered, showing a reduced maximal slope and a reduced range of

blood pressure response (Convertino, 1990; Convertino et al., 1990; Eckberg and Fritsch,

1991). Subjects who had the greatest shift in baroreflex response also experienced the

greatest impairment in post-BR orthostatic tolerance (Convertino, 1990; Convertino

et al., 1990). The importance of this change in carotid cardiac baroreflex response on orthostatic tolerance may depend on the length of the BR and thus on the status of other

cardio-acceleratory

responses, for example, on the aortic baroreflex (Crandall et aL,

1994), vestibular responses (Convertino et al., 1997), sympathetic/vagal

balance, or the

cardiac response to circulating catecholamines.

Insert Figure 1 here. (figure from Eckberg and Fritsch, 1991).

Autonomic Function

Continuous beat-to-beat monitoring of the heart rate and blood pressure is often used as a simple noninvasive method for assessing the status of the autonomic nervous system. Heart-rate time-domain analyses express the data as a spectrum of heart-rate frequencies; the high-frequency domain (0.15 to 0.50 Hz) is used to characterize parasympathetic activity, and the low-frequency domain (0.0 to 0.15 Hz) characterizes sympathetic activity (Fig. 2). A decreased ratio of high/low frequency domains and reduction in total heart-rate variability, as reflected by the total spectrum, is associated with greater orthostatic intolerance (Hughson et al., 1994).

Insert Figure 2 on Spectral Analysis changes and bed rest (Goldberger and Rigney, 1991)

During BR, there are considerable decreases in the heart-rate and blood-pressure

excursions normally associated with changes in posture and activity. Over time these

attenuated excursions may result in resetting of the overall autonomic balance. For

example, after 4 days ofBR, Sigaudo et al. (1996) found a significant decrease in the

high-frequency domain (parasympathetic

activity) without change in the total or low-

frequency domains. However, after 20 hr (Patwardhan et al., 1995), 28 days (Hughson

et aL, 1994), and 42 days (Traon et al., 1998) of BR, decreases in the total and

parasympathetic domain and increases in the sympathetic domain have been reported.

Changes in autonomic function may be mediated by adaptation of the central

nervous system. On the other hand, changes in sympathetic response may be the result of

decreased end-organ responses in the peripheral vasculature or heart muscle; for example,

down-regulation

of the number or sensitivity of alpha-adrenergic

receptors in vascular

smooth muscle would impair hypotensive vasoconstrictor responses. Alpha-adrenergic

function was assessed in six healthy men following 2-3 weeks of BR by measuring

changes in mean arterial pressure following infusions ofphenylephrine

and angiotensin

Schneider, Suzanne

-5-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

II. The infused doses of each drug that were required to produce a given increase in forearm vascular resistance and venous tone were not significantly altered, suggesting there was no change in post-junctional receptor function (Chobanian et al., 1974). However, the vasoconstrictor and venoconstrictor responses to tyramine infusion were attenuated after 12 days ofBR (Schmid et al., 1971), which would suggest decreased synthesis or storage of norepinephrine in pre-junctional nerve endings. Such decreased availability of norepinephrine could account for impaired arterial vasoconstrictor or venous constrictor responses during orthostasis after several days of recumbency.

An up-regulation ofbeta-adrenergic

receptor function could result in increased

heart rate and contractility, arterial and venous vasodilation, and possibly an impaired

ability to vasoconstrict. Several authors have suggested an increased beta-adrenergic

activity during BR from trends toward increasing levels of plasma renin activity during

tilt and infusion of isoproterenol (Melada et al., 1975), and limited improvement in post-

BR orthostatic responses after beta-adrenergic blockade (Melada et al., 1975; Sandler

et al., 1985).

Skeletal Muscle Tone

After only 20 hr of 5 ° head-down tilt, the supine resting stroke volume (SV) of

five men was slightly smaller and the fall in SV in response to LBNP was much greater

than before tilt (Gaffney et al., 1985). The smaller supine SV was most likely related to an 8% reduction in blood volume. However, the greater fall in SV during LBNP could be

a result of an inadequate cardiac response (discussed below) or of a greater pooling of

blood in the lower body. Some investigators (Convertino, et al., 1989; Convertino,

Doerr, and Stein, 1989; Louisy et al., 1990) have suggested that the decrease in orthostatic tolerance after BR may result from a greater pooling of blood in the lower

body, which may occur because of either an absolute loss of muscle mass in the leg

muscles surrounding the veins or because of a generalized loss of skeletal muscle tone.

Luft et al. (1976) reported a significant positive correlation between the degree of leg

pooling during LBNP and orthostatic intolerance; and Convertino et al. (1988) have reported a significant negative correlation between the amount of muscle mass in the

lower leg and leg distensibility. However, after accounting for the decrease in leg diameter that occurs during BR and that associated with fluid shifts and muscle atrophy,

others did not report an increase in leg compliance during LBNP following 13 days of

BR, despite marked hypotensive intolerance in the subjects (Melchior and Fortney,

1993). Thus, loss of leg muscle tone and muscle mass may contribute to the decline in

orthostatic-hypotensive

tolerance, but this loss may become prominent only after the first

couple of weeks of BR.

Cerebral Autoregulation
There is a transient increase in upper-body perfusion and cerebral blood flow that most likely contributes to the initial symptoms of headache and head fullness during the

Schneider, Suzarme

-6-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

first few days ofBR (Guell et al., 1982; Kawai et al., 1993). It is reasonable to expect, after prolonged exposure to the horizontal or head-down body position, that the

adaptation to this redistribution of blood flow toward the head, together with the reduced

variations in cerebral perfusion owing to postural change, might affect cerebral

autoregulation.

Normally, cerebral blood flow is tightly controlled to maintain constant

perfusion over a wide range of arterial blood pressure (50-140 mmHg). With constant

and prolonged exposure to an elevated pressure, it is possible that this autoregulation

curve might be shifted to the right (toward a constant perfusion at higher levels of arterial

pressure) (Fig. 3). Such a shift, however, may result in an attenuated ability to maintain

cerebral perfusion in response to a falling arterial pressure as suggested by an earlier and

greater fall in cerebral blood flow during LBNP in 12 subjects after 2 weeks of BR

(Zhang et al., 1997).

Figure 3 adapted from Bondar et al., 1995

Venous Compliance
Including the liver and spleen, approximately 70% of the circulating blood volume resides in the venous system. Abnormalities in venous "tone" are considered the predominant noncardiac mechanism for reduced tolerance in patients with orthostatic hypotension (Streeten and Scullard, 1996). In the upright body position, the lower body veins are exposed to an hydrostatic pressure, thereby activating a local sympathetic response to increase smooth-muscle constriction to prevent blood pooling. Venous pooling is virtually eliminated in the lower limbs during BR, thus potentially compromising this local smooth-muscle response. Venous tone is also maintained during standing by neurally mediated baroreflex action and in response to circulating vasoactive substances.
Loss of venous tone has been suggested as a prominent contributing mechanism to post-BR orthostatic intolerance (Blamick, Goldwater, and Convertino, 1988; Convertino et al., 1989; Convertino, Doerr, and Stein, 1989; Convertino, 1990; Louisy et al., 1990; Menninger et al., 1969). Although most authors have located this pooling effect in the veins of the legs, a more important site for sequestering blood may be the abdomen. During exposure to -50 mmHg LBNP before 120 days of BR, splanchnic blood volume (estimated by radioisotope imaging) decreased by 3%, indicating a functioning venoconstrictor reflex response; following BR, the splanchnic blood volume increased instead of decreasing during LBNP (Savilov, Lobachik, and Babin, 1990).

Cardiac Compliance

Until recently it was assumed that the cardiac function was not impaired by BR

deconditioning.

Heart size (estimated by echocardiography)

initially increased during

the first 6 hr of BR and then returned to the pre-BR value after 24 hr (Blomqvist et aI.,

1980). After 10 days of BR, the supine left ventricular end diastolic volume was reduced

Schneider, Suzarme

-7-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

by 16% (Hung et al., 1983) which was attributed to the ongoing changes in blood redistribution and volume. Cardiac contractility was maintained both at rest (Hung et al., 1983; Blomqvist et al., 1980) and during exercise (Hung et aL, 1983) following BR.
More recently, however, Levine, Zuckerman, and Pawelczyk (1997) reported decreases in cardiac mass and mechanics after only 2 weeks of BR and proposed that these cardiac changes contributed to the 24% reduction in LBNP tolerance in their 12 subjects. A surprising finding was that cardiac mass appeared to decrease by 5% (P < 0.10) during BR, which was consistent with cardiac atrophy. This decrease in cardiac mass, coupled with a change in the pressure-volume relationship of the heart, suggested decreased chamber distensibility which led to a steeper Starling relationship (Fig. 4). Thus, after BR there appears to be not only reduced resting SV, but also a more precipitous fall in SV in response to any given drop in cardiac filling. Thus, changes in cardiac function may be an important contributor to orthostatic intolerance al_er BR of only 2 weeks.
Insert Figure 4 from Levine et al., 1997.

COUNTERMEASURES

TO PREVENT

INTOLERANCE

DURING BED REST

ORTHOSTATIC-HYPOTENSIVE

With so many factors contributing to BR-induced orthostatic-hypotensive intolerance, it is not surprising that no single treatment or countermeasure has proved

effective. For example, fluid loading may be appropriate after 1 to 2 days of BR, but it offers little benefit aider a few weeks of BR. Data in Fig. 5 illustrate the time-course for

onset of some possible mechanisms for orthostatic intolerance during prolonged

(120-day) BR. These results were compiled from numerous data in the literature that utilized varying BR models; for example, from horizontal to varying angles of HDT, and

with various procedures for orthostatic-hypotensive

testing. Potential treatments at these

various time-points are also indicated.

Insert Figure 5

Fluid/Salt Ingestion
Since fluid loss and reduction in plasma volume (PV) contribute to orthostatic intolerance (Blomqvist et al., 1980) and may be a primary problem after short deconditioning exposures, a simple treatment would be to restore body fluids through oral hydration or infusion. This, however, becomes quite difficult if fluid restoration is started while the subject is supine. Without a hydrostatic gradient, additional hydration is sensed by the body as an over-expansion of blood volume, and it provokes a marked diuresis without sustained expansion of the plasma volume (Frey et al., 1991).

Schneider, Suzarme

-8-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Another approach may be to increase salt intake acutely within hours of the end of BR. There is, however, a very tight balance between adding too little or too much salt to the rehydration solution. Too much salt (3% solution) stimulates reflexes to excrete the excess salt, whereas too little salt (0.45% solution) also triggers reflexes to normalize plasma osmolality by excreting the excess water (Fortney et al., 1994). In addition, the sodium content of the rehydration solution appears to be more important than the total osmolality (Greenleaf et al., 1998a; Greenleaf et aL, 1998b). The most effective acute fluid loading treatment near the end of the BR may be an isotonic or only slightly hypertonic (1.1%) salt solution consisting of 157 mEq.L "1Na, and an osmolality of 270 mOsmkg 1 body weight (Greenleaf, 1998b). However, adding sugar or other osmotic substances to increase palatability of the solution may provoke a diuresis. The most palatable solution tested was isotonic bouillon (Frey et al., 1991; Fortney et al., 1994).
Maintenence of plasma volume (PV) during 30 days of BR by chronic administration of either a higher (10 g/day) or lower (1 g/day) dietary salt intake, was compared to that during a normal diet of 4 g/day. Both the high- and low-salt diets resulted in a smaller PV compared with the normal diet by the end of 21 days of BR. The high-salt diet initially expanded PV, but induced decreased aldosterone and antidiuretic hormone concentrations and increased atrial natiuretic factor levels which subsequently reduced PV (Williams et al., 1999).

Intermittent Tilt/LBNP

It is not clear that continuous BR is necessary to induce orthostatic intolerance. Vernikos et al. (1996) allowed subjects to stand or walk for either 2 or 4 hr each day during a 4-day, 6 ° head-down BR period. Orthostatic tolerance was assessed by time and hemodynamic responses to 30 min of 60 ° HUT. Although 2 hr of quiet standing only partially prevented orthostatic intolerance, 4 hr completely prevented it. Walking at a rate of 3 mi.hr 1 for 4 hr each day provided no additional benefit over standing. Therefore, only 4 hr each day of either real or simulated hydrostatic gradients may be sufficient to reverse BR-induced orthostatic intolerance.

Lower body negative pressure can simulate some effects of gravity by inducing fluid shit, s from the upper to the lower body (Wolthuis, Bergman, and Nicogossian,

1974). Exposure to LBNP may be expected to counteract many of the proposed mechanisms that contribute to hypotensive intolerance, for example, by stimulating

arterial and cardiopulmonary

baroreflexes, or by provoking release of hormones that

restore body fluids, or by stimulating leg vascular smooth muscle. Hyatt and West

(1977) have shown that a 4-hr exposure to a mild level of LBNP (-30 mmHg) improved

PV and orthostatic responses following 7 days of BR and it was even more effective

when the subjects ingested 1 liter of an isotonic saline solution (bouillon) during the LBNP treatment. On the other hand, 2 hr of LBNP plus similar fluid ingestion was not sufficient to maintain orthostatic tolerance during 13 days of BR (Fortney et al., 1992).

Therefore, LBNP, like standing, may require at least a 4-hr daily treatment to be effective.

Schneider, Suzanne

-9-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Exercise Training

Exercise training during BR would be expected to affect many of the potential

mechanisms influencing orthostatic intolerance; for example, 1 hr of supine isotonic

exercise daily during 30 days of 6 ° HDT BR maintained plasma volume at control levels

(Greenleaf et al., 1992). Exercise training also increases the sensitivity of the carotid cardiac baroreflex (Halliwill et al., 1996; Convertino, 1990), and would be expected to

increase skeletal muscle tone, stimulate splanchnic vasoconstriction,

increase cardiac

contractility, increase cerebral blood flow (Thomas et al., 1989), and increase

sympathetic tone. Therefore, it is surprising that use of exercise training to restore orthostatic function during BR has produced mostly negative results (Birkhead et al., 1966; Greenleaf, Wade, and Leffheriotis, 1989) with a few exceptions when the training was combined with a simultaneous orthostatic stressor, either upright posture (Birkhead

et al., 1964; Sullivan et al., 1985) or LBNP (Watenpaugh et al., 1994). Whether exercise

training can reduce the required time of exposure to an upright or simulated upright

posture to maintain orthostatic or hypotensive tolerance is unclear. One possible effect of

the training is to redistribute blood flow away from the central volume into exercising

muscles, which may increase the effectiveness of a tilt or LBNP countermeasure.

Pharmacological

Treatments

Various pharmacological

treatments, tested after BR, have met with only partial

success in preventnig orthostatic intolerance. The major difficulty in using drugs is that

treatment of a condition that has multiple causative factors would require a cocktail of

drugs, all with potentially undesirable side effects.

Dobutamine is a synthetic catecholamine that stimulates alpha- and betaadrenergic receptors that induce cardiovascular responses similar to those that occur during exercise. Results of dobutamine infusion have not demonstrated significant improvement in orthostatic function during hind-limb suspension in rats (Tipton and Sebastian, 1997) or during BR in humans (Sullivan et al., 1985).

Other drugs that offer some protection against orthostatic intolerance in

hospitalized patients that might improve orthostatic intolerance in healthy people include

the fluorohydrocorticoids

(Bohnn et al., 1970; Vernikos et al., 1991) or antidiuretic

hormone analogues (Kochar, 1985) which could restore body fluids and provide some

improvement during short-duration BR. Alpha-adrenergic

angonists such as midodrine

(Low et aL, 1997) and ergotamine (Biaggioni et al., 1990) might enhance vascular constriction and offer some protection especially during a longer (>2 wk) BR. Similarly,

beta-adrenergic blockers such as propranolol have been suggested for maintenance of

vascular tone following BR (Sandler et aI., 1985).

Schneider, Suzarme

-10-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS

FOR ORTHOSTATIC

AND THE BED-RESTED PATIENT

INTOLERANCE

Orthostatic intolerance can be a problem even for healthy individuals after a few hours of BR. Upon reambulation, the longer the BR period, the longer the recovery of blood pressure control. Potentially complicating effects from illness or medication may greatly increase the susceptibility to orthostatic intolerance. This may be of special concern for older patients with weakened bones, atrophied muscles, or impaired postural control. Such patients should be moved to an upright or semi-upright posture for at least 4 hr each day and encouraged to move their legs, especially when in the upright position. They should be assisted during the first few hours and even the first few days after arising and warned against the hazards of exposure to a hot shower or a hot environment which can increase susceptibility to fainting. Extra fluid and salt in their diet during the days before reambulation, and extra fluid ingestion for the first few days after arising, may accelerate their recovery. Vasoconstrictor and especially venoconstrictor countermeasures may be required for patients who do not recover rapidly upon reambulation. Mechanical supports such as elastic stockings or abdominal compression may be used in preference to pharmacological treatment.

Schneider, Suzarme

- 1!-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

REFERENCES

Altura, B. M. Sex and oestrogens

neurohypophyseal

hormones

403-412, 1975.

and responsiveness and catecholamines.

of terminal arterioles to J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 193:

Biaggioni, I., Zygmunt, D., Halle, V., and Robertson, D. Pressor effect of inhaled ergotamine in orthostatic hypotension. Am. J. Cardiol. 65: 8-92, 1990.

Birkhead, N. C., Blizzard, J. J., Daly, J. W., Haupt, G. J., Issekutz, B., Jr., Myers, R. N.,

and Rodahl, K. Cardiodynamic and metabolic effects of prolonged bed rest with

daily recumbent or sitting exercise and with sitting inactivity. Aerospace Medical

Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson

Air Force Base, Ohio, AMRL-TDR-64-

61, 1964, 28 pp.

Birkhead, N. C., Blizzard, J. J., Issekutz, B., and Rodahl, K. Effect of exercise, standing,

negative trunk and positive skeletal pressure on bed-rest-induced orthostasis and

hypercalciuria. Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson

Air

Force Base, Ohio, AMRL-TR-66-6,

1966, 29 pp.

Blamick, C. A., Goldwater, D. J., and Convertino, during acute orthostasis following simulated Med. 59: 40-43, 1988.

V. A. Leg vascular responsiveness

weightlessness.

Aviat. Space Environ.

Blomqvist, C. G., Nixon, J. V., Johnson, R. L., and Mitchell, J. H. Early cardiovascular adaptation to zero gravity simulated by head-down tilt. Acta Astronautica 7: 543553, 1980.

Bohnn, B. J., Hyatt, K. H., Kamenetsky, L. G., Calder, B. E., and Smith, W. M.

Prevention of bed-rest-induced

orthostatism by 9-alpha-fluorohydrocortisone.

Aerospace Med. 41: 495-499, 1970.

Bondar, R. L., Kassam, M. S., Stein, F., Dunphy, P. T., Fortney, S., and Riedesel, M. L. Simultaneous cerebrovascular and cardiovascular responses during presyncope. Stroke 26: 1794-1800, 1995.

Butler, G. C., Xing, H. C., Northey, D. R., and Hughson, R. L. Reduced orthostatic tolerance following 4 h head-down tilt. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 62: 26-30, 1991.

Chobanian, A. V., Lille, R. D., Tercyak, A., and Blevins, P. The metabolic and hemodynamic effects of prolonged bed rest in normal subjects. Circulation 49: 551-559, 1974.

Convertino, V. A. Carotid-cardiac baroreflex: relation with orthostatic hypotension

following simulated microgravity and implications for development of

countermeasures.

Acta Astronautica 23: 9-17, 1990.

Schneider, Suzarme

-12-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Convertino, V. A., Adams, W. C., Shea, J. D., Thompson, C. A., and Hoffler, G. W. Impairment of carotid-cardiac vagal baroreflex in wheelchair-dependent quadriplegics. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 260: R576R580, 1991.

Convertino, V. A., Doerr, D. F., Eckberg, D. L., Fritsch, J. M., and Vernikos-Danellis,

J.

Head-down bed rest impairs vagal baroreflex responses and provokes orthostatic

hypotension. J. Appl. Physiol. 68: 1458-1464, 1990.

Convertino, V. A., Doerr, D. F., Flores, J. F., Homer, G. W., and Buchanan, and muscle functions associated with leg compliance. J. Appl. Physiol. 1021, 1988.

P. Leg size 64: 1017-

Convertino, V. A., Doerr, D. F., Mathes, K. L., Stein, S. L., and Buchanan, P. Changes in volume, muscle compartment, and compliance of the lower extremeties in man following 30 days of exposure to simulated microgravity. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 60: 653-658, 1989.

Convertino, V. A., Doerr, D. F., and Stein, S. L. Changes in size and compliance of the calf after 30 days of simulated microgravity. J. Appl. Physiol. 66: 1509-1512, 1989.

Convertino, V. A., Previc, F. H., Ludwig, D. A., and Engelken, E. J. Effects of vestibular

and oculomotor simulation on responsiveness of the carotid-cardiac baroreflex.

Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 42:R615-R622,

1997.

Crandall, C. G., Engelke, K. A., Convertino, V. A., and Raven, P. B. Aortic baroreflex control of heart rate after 15 days of simulated microgravity exposure. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 77: 2134-2139, 1994.

Eckberg, D. L., and Fritsch, J.M. Human autonomic responses to actual and simulated

weightlessness.

J. Clin. Pharmacol. 31: 951-955, 1991.

Fortney, S. M., Schneider, V. S., and Greenleaf, J. E. The physiology Handbook of Physiology: Section 4: Environmental Physiology, Fregly and C. M. Blatteis, Oxford University Press: New York, 1996, pp. 889-939.

of bed rest. In edited by M. J. Vol. 2, Chap. 39,

Fortney, S. M., Steinmann, L., Dussack, L., Wood, M., Cintron, N., and Whitson, P.

Investigations of the mechanisms by which lower body negative pressure (LBNP)

improves orthostatic responses. 43 r° Congress of the International Astronautical

Federation, 1992, IAP/IAA-92-0263,

Washington, DC, 1992.

Fortney, S. M., Steinmann, L., Young, J. A., Hoskin, loading solutions and plasma volume: astro-ade Houston, TX, NASA TP-3456, 1994, 25 pp.

C. N., and Barrows, L. H. Fluidand salt tablets with water.

Schneider, Suzarme

-13-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Frey, M. A. B., and Homer, G. W. Association of sex and age with responses to lower-

body negative pressure. J. Appl. Physiol. 65:1752-1756,

1988.

Frey, M. A. B., Mathes, K. L., and Hoffler, G. W. Cardiovascular responses of women to lower body negative pressure. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 57:531-538, 1986.

Frey, M. A. B., Riddle, J., Charles, to ingesting fluids of various 31: 8880-8887, 1991.

J. B., and Bungo, M. W. Blood salt and glucose concentrations.

and urine responses J Clin. Pharmacol.

Gaffney, F. A., Nixon, J. V., Erling, M. D., Karlsson, S., Campbell, W., Dowdey, A. B. C., and Blomqvist, C. G. Cardiovascular deconditioning produced by 20 hours of bed rest with head-down tilt (-5 °) in middle-aged healthy men. Am. J. Cardiol. 56: 634-638, 1985.

Gauer, O. H., and Henry, J. P. Circulatory 43: 423-481, 1963.

basis of fluid volume control. Physiol. Rev.

Gilmore, J. P., and Zucker, I. H. Failure of left atrial distention to alter renal fimction in the nonhuman primate. Circ. Res. 42: 267-270, 1978.

Goldberger, A. L., and Rigney, D. R. Cardiovascular dynamics during space sickness

and deconditioning.

In Proceedings of the First Joint NASA Cardiopulmonary

Workshop, edited by S. Fortney and A. R. Hargens, NASA CR-10068, 155-163.

1991, pp.

Greenleaf, J. E. Hormonal regulation of fluid and electrolytes during prolonged bed-rest: implications for microgravity. In Hormonal Regulation of Fluid and Electrolytes, edited by J. R. Claybaugh and C. E. Wade, Plenum Publishing Corp.: New York, 1989, pp. 215-232.

Greenleaf, J. E., Bernauer, E. M., Young, H. L., Morse, J. T., Staley, R. W., Juhos, L. T., and Van Beaumont, W. Fluid and electrolyte shifts during bed rest with isometric and isotonic exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 42: 59-66, 1977.

Greenleaf, J. E., Jackson, C. G. R., Geelen, G., Keil, L. C., Hinghofer-Szalkay,

H., and

Whittam, J. H. Plasma volume expansion with oral fluids in hypohydrated men at

rest and during exercise. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69: 837-844, 1998a.

Greenleaf, J. E., Loofl-Wilson, R., Wisherd, J. L., Jackson, C. G. R., Fung, P. P., Ertl, A. C., Barnes, P. R., Jensen, C. D., and Whittam, J. H. Hypervolemia in men from fluid ingestion at rest and during exercise. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69: 374-386, 1998b.

Schneider, Suzarme

-14-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Greenleaf, J. E., Van Beaumont, W., Bemauer, E. M., Haines, R. F., Sandler, H., Staley, R.W., Young, H. L., and Yusken, J. W. Effects ofrehydration on +Gz tolerance after 14-days bed rest. Aerospace Med. 44: 715-722, 1973.

Greenleaf, J. E., Vernikos, J., Wade, C. E., and Barnes, P. R. Effect of leg exercise training on vascular volumes during 30 days of 6 ° head-down bed rest. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 72: 1887-1894, 1992.

Greenleaf, J. E., Wade, C. E., and Leftheriotis, day bed rest deconditioning with isotonic Space Environ. Med. 60: 537-542, 1989.

G. Orthostatic and isokinetic

responses following 30exercise training. Aviat.

Guell, A., Dupui, P. H., Barrere, M., Fanjaud, G., and Bes, A. Changes in the loco-

regional cerebral blood flow (r.C.B.F.) during a simulation of weightlessness.

Acta

Astronautica 9: 689-690, 1982.

Halliwill, J. R., Taylor, J. A., Hartwig, T. D., and Eckberg, D. L. Augmented baroreflex

heart rate gain after moderate-intensity,

dynamic exercise. Am. J. Physiol.

Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 270: R420-R426, 1996.

Harper, C. M., and Lyles, Y. M. Physiology Geriatr. Soc. 36: 1047-1054, 1988.

and complications

of bed rest. J. Am.

Hassan, A. A. K., Carter, G., Tooke, J. E. Postural vasoconstriction menstrual cycle. Clin. Sci. 78: 39-47, 1990.

during the normal

Hordinsky, J. R., Gebhardt, biochemical response 52: 16-18, 1981.

U., Wegmann, H. M., and Schafer, G. Cardiovascular to simulated space flight entry. Aviat. Space Environ.

and Med.

Hughson, R. L., Yamamoto, Y., Maillet, A., Fortrat, J. O., Traon, A. P., Butler, G. C.,

Guell, A., and Gharib, C. Altered autonomic regulation of cardiac function during

head-up tilt after 28-day head-down bed rest with counter-measures.

Clin. Physiol.

14: 291-304, 1994.

Hung, H., Goldwater, D., Convertino, V. A., McKillop, J. H., Goris, M. L., and Debusk, R.F. Mechanisms for decreased exercise capacity after bed rest in normal middleaged men. Am. J Cardiol. 51: 344-348, 1983.

Hyatt, K. H., and West, D. A. Reversal ofbedrest-induced

orthostatic

lower body negative pressure and saline. Aviat. Space Environ. 1977.

intolerance by Med. 48:120-124,

Kawai, Y., Murthy, G., Watenapaugh, D. E., Breit, G. A., Deroshia, C. W., and Hargens, A.R. Cerebral blood flow velocity in humans exposed to 24 h of head-down tilt. J.._Appl. Physiol. 74: 3046-3051, 1993.

Schneider, Suzarme

- ! 5-

m

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Kochar, M. S. Hemodynamic effects of lysine-vasopressin Am. J. Kidney Dis. 6: 49-52, 1985.

in orthostatic hypotension.

Lamb, L. E., Johnson, R. L., Stevens, P. M., and Welch, B. E. Cardiovascular deconditioning from space cabin simulator confinement. Aerospace Med. 35: 420-428, 1964.

Lathers, C. M., and Charles, J. B. Use of lower body negative pressure symptoms of orthostatic intolerance in patients, bed rest subjects, 3. Clin. Pharmacol. 33:1071-1085, 1993.

to counter and astronauts.

Levine, B. D., Zuckerman, J. H., and Pawelczyk, J. A. Cardiac atrophy after bed-rest

deconditioning:

a non-neural mechanism for orthostatic intolerance. Circulation

96: 517-525, 1997.

Louisy, F., Gaudin, C., Oppert, J. M., Guell, A., and Guezennec, of leg veins during a 30 days-6-degrees head-down bedrest body negative pressure. Eur. 3. Appl. Physiol. 61: 349-355,

C. Y. Haemodynamics with and without lower
1990.

Low, P. A., Gilden, J. L., Freeman, R., Sheng, K. N., and McElligott, M. A. Efficacy of

midodrine vs. placebo in neurogenic orthostatic hypotension: a randomized, double-

blind multicenter study. Midodrine Study Group. J.A.M.A. 277:1046-1051,

1997.

Luft, U. C., Myhre, L. G., Loeppky, J. A., and Venters, M. D. A study of factors affecting tolerance to gravitational stress simulated by lower body negative pressure. Lovelaee Foundation: Albuquerque, NM, 1976, 60 pp.

Melada, G. A., Goldman, R. H., Luetscher, J. A., and Zager, P. G. Hemodynamics, function, plasma renin, and aldosterone in man after 5 to 14 days of bed-rest. Space Environ. Med. 46: 1049-1055, 1975.

renal Aviat.

Melchior, F. M., and Fortney, S.M. Orthostatic intolerance during a 13-day bed-rest does not result from increased leg compliance. J. Appl. Physiol. 74: 286-292, 1993.

Menninger, R. P., Mains, R. C., Zechman, F. W., and Piemme, bed rest on venous pooling in the lower limbs. Aerospace 1969.

T. A. Effect of two weeks Med. 40: 1323-1326,

Montgomery, L. D., Kirk, P. J., Payne, P. A., Gerber, R. L., Newton, S. D., and Williams, B.A. Cardiovascular responses of men and women to lower body negative pressure. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 48: 138-145, 1977.

Norsk, P. Role of arginine vasopressin in the regulation of extracellular Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 28: Suppl 10: $36-$41,1996.

fluid volume.

Schneider, Suzanne

- 16-

7.

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Pannier, B. M., Lacolley, P. J., Gharib, C., London, G. M., Cuche, J. L., Duchier,

Levy, B. I., and Safar, M. E. Twenty-four hours of bed rest with head-down

venous and arteriolar changes in limbs. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.

HI043-H1050,

1991.

J. L., tilt: 260:

Patwardhan, A. R., Evans, J. M., Berk, M., Grande, K. J., Charles, J. B., and Knapp, C. F. Spectral indices of cardiovascular adaptations to short-term simulated microgravity exposure. Integr. Physiol. Behav. Sci. 30: 201-214, 1995.

Rahman, M. A., Goodhead, K., Medcalf, J. F., O'Connor, M., and Bennett, T. Haemodynamic responses to nonhypotensive central hypovolemia induced by lower
body negative pressure in men and women. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 63: 151-155, 1991.

Raven, P. B., Welch-O'Connor,

R. M., and Shi, X. Cardiovascular function following

reduced aerobic activity. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 30: 1041-1052, 1998.

Sandler, H., Goldwater, D. J., Popp, R. L., Spaccavento, L., and Harrison, D. C. Beta blockade in the compensation for bed-rest cardiovascular deconditioning: physiological and pharmacologic observations. Am. J. Cardiol. 55:114D-119D, 1985.

Savilov, A. A., Lobachik, V. I., and Babin, A. M. Cardiovascular function of man exposed to LBNP tests. Physiologist 33: S128-S132, 1990.

Schmid, P. G., McCally, M., Piemme, T. E., and Shaver, J. A. Effects of bed rest on

forearm vascular responses to tyramine and norepinephrine.

In Hypogravic and

Hypodynamic Environments, edited by R. H. Murray and M. McCally,

Washington, DC, NASA SP-269, 1971, pp. 211-223.

Shi, X., Squires, W. G., Williamson, J. W., Crandall, C. G., Chen, J. J., Krock, L. P., and Raven, P. B. Aerobic fitness: 1. Response of volume regulating hormones to headdown tilt. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 24: 991-998, 1992.

Sigaudo, D., Fortrat, J. O., Maillet, A., Allevard, A. M., Traon, A. P. L., Hughson, R. L., Guell, A., Gharib, C., and Gauquelin, G. Comparison of a 40-day confinement and head-down tilt on endocrine response and cardiovascular variability in humans. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 73: 28-37, 1996.

Streeten, D. H. P., and Scullard, T. F. Excessive gravitational blood pooling caused by impaired venous tone is the predominant non-cardiac mechanism of orthostatic intolerance. Clin. Sci. 90: 277-285, 1996.

Sullivan, M. J., Binkley, F., Unvergerth, D. V., Ren, J. H., Boudoulas, H., Bashore,

T. M., Merola, A. J., and Leier, C. V. Prevention of bed-rest-induced

physical

deconditioning by daily dobutamine infusions. J. Clin. Invest. 76: 1632-1642, 1985.

Schneider, Suzanne

-17-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Thomas, S. N., Schroeder, T., Secher, N. H., and Mitchell, J. H. Cerebral blood flow

during submaximal 744-748, 1989.

and maximal dynamic exercise in humans. Ł AppL Physiol. 67:

Tipton, C. M., and Sebastian, L. A. Dobutamine as a countermeasure exercise performance of rats exposed to simulated microgravity. 82: 1607-1615, 1997.

for reduced J. Appl. Physiol.

Traon, A. P. L., Sigaudo, D., Vasseur, P., Maillet, A., Fortrat, J. O., Hughson, R. L.,

Gauquelin-Koch,

G., and Gharib, C. Cardiovascular responses to orthostatic tests

after a 42-day head-down bed-rest. Eur. J Appl. Physiol. 77: 50-59, 1998.

Vemikos, J., Dallman, M. F., Keil, L. C., O'Hare, D., and Convertino, V.A. Gender differences in endocrine responses to posture and 7 days of-6 ° head down bed-rest. Am. J.. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 265: EI53-E161, 1993.
Vernikos, L, Dallman, M. F., Van Loon, G., and Keil, L. C. Drug effects on orthostatic intolerance induced by bed-rest. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 31: 974-984, 1991.

Vemikos, J., Ludwig, D. A., Ertl, A. C., Wade, C. E., Keil, L., and O'Hare, D. Effect of standing and walking on physiological changes induced by head-down bed rest: implications for spaceflight. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 67: 1069-1079, 1996.

Vogt, F.B. Tilt table and plasma volume changes with short term deconditioning experiments. Aerospace Med. 38: 564-568, 1967.

Von Eiff, A. W., Plotz, E. J., Beck, K. J., and Czemik, A. The effect of estrogens and

progesterones on blood pressure regulation of normotensive Gynecol. 109: 887-892, 1971.

women. Am. J. Obstet.

Watenpaugh, D. E., Fortney, S. M, Ballard, R. E., Lee, S. M. C., Bennett, B. S., Murthy, G., Kramer, G. C., and Hargens, A. R. Lower body negative pressure during bedrest maintains orthostatic tolerance. FASEB J. 8: A261, 1994.

Williams, W. J., Lee, S. M. C., Stuart, C. A., Whitson, of bed-rest and dietary sodium on forearm blood negative pressure (LBNP). FASEB J: 13: A405,

P. A., and Schneider, S. M. Effect flow (FBF) during lower body 1999.

Wolthuis, R. A., Bergman, S. A., and Nicogossian, A. E. Physiological effects of locally applied reduced pressure in man. Physiol. Rev. 54: 566-595, 1974.

Zhang, R., Zuckerman, J. H., Pawelczyk, bed rest on cerebral hemodynamics 2139-2145, 1997.

J. A., and Levine, B. D. Effects of head-down during orthostatic stress. J. AppI. Physiol. 83:

Schneider, Suzarme

-18-

Bed Rest and Orthostatic-Hypotensive

Intolerance

Figure 1. Change in the carotid sinus cardiac baroreflex after BR. Change in heart-rate, expressed in terms of R-R interval, is plotted against the change in carotid distending pressure induced with a neck chamber. Data are the responses of six subjects before and after 10 days of BR. (From Eckberg and Fritsch, 1991 with permission).

Figure 2. Heart-rate time series and spectra from a representative healthy adult female

before and after 9 days of BR. There is a prominent, vagally-mediated

high-frequency

peak pre-BR associated with metronomic breathing at 0.25 Hz. After bed rest there is an

attenuation of this peak. (From Goldberger and Rigney, 1991 with permission).

Figure 3. A possible shift in the cerebral autoregulation curve following BR. A dynamic rightward shift of the autoregulation curve means that a lower level of cerebral blood flow (CBF) will be attained at higher cerebral perfusion pressures (CPP) following BR. Adapted from Bondar et al. (1995).

Figure 4. Change in the Starling curve relating cardiac filling (as estimated by the pulmonary wedge pressure (PWC) and stroke volume (measured by echocardiography) before and after 2 weeks of BR. This curve was created by reducing cardiac filling by application of-15 and -30 mmHg lower body negative pressure (the 2 lowest points) and by increasing cardiac filling by saline infusion of 15 and 30 mL/kg (the 2 highest points). The two middle points represent the baseline values before LBNP or saline infusion. (From Levine, Zuckerman, and Pawelczyk, 1997 with permission).

Figure 5. Summary of physiological changes during BR that may contribute to

orthostatic-hypotensive

intolerance and potential treatments.

Schneider, Suzarme

- 19-

3O0

200
(.1
E

Pre-bedrest

0

P
˘D

100

h-

I

T T,_1 -L P°st-bedrest

n-

<_ i-li

n=6

-10oi

|

I

140

210

Carotid distending pressure, mmHg

Schneider fig. 1.1

,_>>._ -- i

,."

!

i

,_dq'e|eJ lietiH

ilpnl!ldUiV

ul

.E

.._

d!

,- ,,- ,tudq 'flilti lJeeH

epnl!ldtUV

j- /? ,_/

i

a_

___/

m
Ililili

/h

.* *" _*****"

Tphrreessyhnoclodpe of --_

7"'::'" ...........................................

m

w

50

140

Cerebral perfusion pressure, mmHg

Schneic_

fig. 1.3

........

_'4' t q_-r,. _ -_

120

"_loo

2 6O

_-

/

/

40 /_4

0 Pre-bedrest · Post-bedrest

0

i

0

4

n

i

8

12

i

I

16

20

Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, mmHg

Schneider fig. 1.4

f

0
0
Iu c
"i

I

I

®_-_

i',,,-

"0

v

4_

ID

OI

2

.D

@i 4)

"_-I.-_-_

_ 01 < _

o x ˘II
_s
c%1
&-
Z

o

_*"

.c

0Q

o,

i i, __

i,=

"_®_i

"i:i:

I =11 .®,-®"'_® ®,,i

_

_i,i,,. i i_ @ i,-i,=

m<___

_i
J

v.

.M

/,iv/

9. THERMOREGULATION

DURING DECONDITIONING

Suzanne M. Schneider" and John E. Greenleaf _

Man is the shuttle, to whose winding quest
And passage through these looms God order'd motion, but ordain'd no rest.
HENRY VAUGHAN

INTRODUCTION

The importance of maintaining body temperature is well understood by both clinicians and lay persons. The normal, resting body core temperature (Too) is about 37 °C (98.6 T), and death often occurs when it falls below 27 °C (80.6 °F) or exceeds 42 °C (107.6 °F). Thus, for survival the degree of overheating is more critical than that for overcooling. The lower limit of Too for onset of heatstroke is usually only 41 °C - 42 °C (105.8 °F - 107.6 °F) (Shibolet, Lancaster, and Danon, 1976), but classic heatstroke has occurred with T˘o as low as 40.6 °C (105.1 °F) (Leithead and Lind, 1964).

Not only the absolute level of Too but also the rate of heat exchange is important in

the onset of heat maladies. Unacclimated men resting in a hot, humid environment--

42°C (107.6 °F) and a relative humidity (rh) of 90%---can be near their limits of tolerance

and consciousness with T,o of 38.5 °C (101.3 °F) (Convertino, Greenleaf, and Bemauer,

1980). However, during intense exercise, rectal temperatures (T_) in the heatstroke range have occurred with no lasting adverse signs or symptoms. Robinson (1963) measured

rectal temperatures of40.O °C and 41.1 °C (104.0 °F, 105.9°F) in two runners after a 5-km race, and Pugh, Corbett, and Johnson, (1967) observed temperatures of 41.1 °C, 40.5 °C, and 40.2 °C (104.0 °F, 104.9 °F, 104.4 °F, respectively) in the first-, third-, and fourth-

place finishers, respectively, of a marathon race. Under normal ambient conditions, heat exhaustion (caused by dehydration and excessive salt loss) and physical debilitation

usually occur before the onset of heatstroke (which is often associated with cessation of

sweating). When heat flow from the body is reduced, such as when astronauts work in

an extravehicular-activity

(EVA) suit at a rate such that heat removal is significantly less

than heat production, skin temperature rises. This rise in skin temperature then results in a

reduced core-to-skin temperature gradient, which causes Tco to rise. Under such conditions of attenuated heat dissipation, significant signs and symptoms of heat stress

"Research Physiologist, Houston, Texas

Exercise Physiology Laboratory, NASA, Johnson Space Center,

tResearch Physiologist, Laboratory for Human Environmental Research Center, Moffett Field, California

Physiology, NASA, Ames

Thermoregulationduring Deconditioning

canoccurat T_oaslow as38 °C (100.4 °F) (Tanaka, Brisson, and Voile, 1978; Smith,
1980). Thus, without knowledge of the situation in which the temperature is measured, it is clear that the absolute value of Too per se cannot be used to determine the physiological states of workers or astronauts, or to predict when heat exhaustion or heatstroke are likely to occur.

Humans are uniquely prepared to defend their body thermoregulatory

state,

especially against increases in body temperature. They possess very effective and

efficient sweating and vasodilatory reflexes which are activated as soon as T˘o exceeds a

threshold value; the threshold value varies, depending on the state of hydration, fitness,

heat acclimation, time of day, or (in females) the phase of the menstrual cycle.

Adverse changes in thermoregulation during spaceflight could significantly affect

the comfort, performance, and even survival of crew members. In a normal environment, behavioral modifications can maintain body temperature under all but the

most extreme conditions. However, during flight, the confinement and restricted

resources limit astronauts' ability to alter environmental conditions or activity levels.

When environmental control fails--such as during the recent Mir 19 mission when leaks

in the cooling system sent cabin temperatures to 36 °C (96.8 °F) for several days, and

during the Apollo 13 mission when the crew, returning from a failed Moon landing, was

exposed to near freezing temperatures for several days----appropriate thermoregulatory

responses become critical. Thermoregulation

may also be compromised when crew

members wear impermeable clothing such as the EVA suit or a launch and entry suit

(LES), even though these garments contain liquid cooling systems. For example, if the

cooling system malfunctions, if the crew must work harder than expected, or if they must disconnect from the cooling system as they might during an emergency landing, then heat

loss would be attenuated and body temperatures could rise to lethal levels within minutes

(Pandolf et al., 1995).

During long-duration space missions it is expected that crew members will

exercise and this might help them maintain thermoregulatory capacity. On the other

hand, it is probable that they will lose their heat acclimation status, particularly since many of them exercise in the heat and humidity of Houston, Texas. It is probable that

crew members lose body fluids during spaceflight, but this is still an open question. When body fluid compartments were measured in seven crew members during the SLS-1 and SLS-2 Shuttle missions, extracellular fluid volume was reduced, but the volume of

total body water was unchanged from preflight levels. These surprising results suggest

that there is a redistribution of body water from the extracellular to the cellular fluid

compartment (Leach et al., 1996). Nonetheless, a reduction in extracellular volume

would have a negative effect on thermoregulation

in both hot (Sawka et al., 1992,

Fortney et al., 1981) and cold (O'Brien, Young, and Sawka, 1998) environments.

Other homeostatic changes associated with prolonged spaceflight may affect

thermoregulation

and thus crew performance or comfort. The normal 24-hr circadian

change in body temperature is disrupted with exposure to the 90-min day/night cycles in

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-2-

°T

--

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

orbital flight (Lhagwa, 1984; Czeisler, Chiasera_ and Duffy, 1991). Lack of appropriate

circadian temperature fluctuations may affect crew sleep, alertness, and cognitive

function. In response, the crew frequently uses pharmacological aids to help them sleep

and stay alert. However, the pharmoldnetics of some drugs used in weightlessness may

be impaired, thus resulting in a need for stronger dosages in space than are used on the

ground (Putcha et al., 1999). And some of these drugs (e.g., sleeping medications,

adrenergic stimulants) can interfere with normal thermoregulatory

function.

The physical effects of weightlessness on heat loss responses have not been well investigated; however, convective heat loss is greatly compromised and evaporative heat

loss may also be impaired (Leach et al., 1978). These effects on convection and evaporation can be minimized by increasing air flow and reducing ambient humidity.

The specific environments described below.

that crew members may be expected to encounter are

SPACEFLIGHT

ENVIRONMENT

lntravehicular Activities: Shuttle, Mir, International Space Station
Beginning with Skylab flights in 1973, all American space vehicles for humans, as well as the Russian Mir and the International Space Station (ISS), have been designed to maintain an atmosphere similar to that on Earth. During long-duration spaceflights, crew members are required to perform rather intense aerobic and resistive exercise as countermeasures in an effort to maintain in-flight health and to prepare them for a successful landing. Despite the almost daily exercise, however, all crew members have significant difficulty maintaining exercise and orthostatic capacities throughout longduration flights.
Shuttle
The Shuttle environmental control system was designed to maintain the ambient temperature between 18 °C and 27 °C (64.4 °F and 80.6 °F), the relative humidity between 23% and 90%, and a variable air flow between 0.1 and 0.2 m.sec _ (Waligora, Powell, and Sauer, 1994). The atmospheric environment in the Shuttle is maintained at 101.3 kPa (14.7 psi) with a gas composition of approximately 80% N 2, 20% 05, with less than 0.5 % COs.
In-flight exercise training is required of all crew members on American flights that last longer than 10 days. The Shuttle flight exercise program calls for at least 20 min of aerobic exercise every other day for the flight crew (pilot, copilot, and navigator) and every third day for mission and payload specialists. The exercise devices that have been available on Shuttle flights in the past have included a treadmill, a cycle ergometer, or a rower.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-3-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Mir
On the Russian Mir space station the atmospheric guidelines are similar to the American guidelines: 19.9% to 22.5% 02, 0.7% to 1.0% CO2 with the balance N2; ambient temperature is maintained between 18 °C and 28 °C (64.4 °F and 82.4 °F), the relative humidity between 30% and 70%, and the airflow between 0.05 and 0.2 m.sec -1 (Wieland, 1998).
During Mir missions, which typically last 3-4 months but have lasted longer than a year, the crew members perform approximately 1-2 hr of exercise daily, but the schedule varies depending on the stage of the mission. Late in the mission, the exercise sessions increase in intensity, frequency, and duration. The Russian exercise countermeasure program consists of aerobic cycle or treadmill exercises interspersed with stretching and resistive exercises against bungi cord expanders. Exercise intensity is prescribed individually for the crew. Heart rate records from American crew members performing this countermeasure program show variations: for very light exercise levels the average heart rate is about 60% of maximal; for the more challenging programs there are peaks of near maximal heart rate during, for example, the treadmill sprints.
International Space Station (ISS)
During the assembly phase of the ISS, three crew members will be traveling to and from the station on the Shuttle or on the Salyut vehicle and they will live and work on the station for 4-6 months. The assembly phase is expected to last about 5 yr and involve about 22 Shuttle flights and 41 Russian flights. After assembly has been completed, seven or eight crew members will spend approximate 4-mo periods on the station. The environmental guidelines for the ISS are: 76.5% to 79.4% N 2, 19.9%-22.5% Oz, 0.7% to 1.(Y'/oCOz, an ambient temperature of 10 °C - 27°C (64.4 °F - 80.6OF), a relative humidity of 25% - 70%, a total pressure of 97.89 kPa - 102.7 kPa (14.2 - 14.9 psi) and an intramodule air flow of 0.2 re.see _ (Wieland, 1998).
The exercise countermeasure program for the ISS will include at least 30 min of aerobic and 45 min of resistive exercise daily for 6 days each week, with the seventh day optional. The aerobic exercise will be performed on a treadmill or cycle on alternate days. The treadmill protocol involves continuous, moderate exercise at 70% of the maximal oxygen uptake ('v'O2,,_) and is designed to maintain aerobic endurance. The cycle protocol involves interval exercise with short bursts of intense exercise (90% VO2,_) to maintain anaerobic as well as aerobic capacity. The resistance exercise devices are yet to be specified, but during initial ISS assembly they will include a pulleytype device to exercise specific upper and lower body muscle groups by repeated maximal contractions. The exercises will stress primarily postural and lower body muscle groups (e.g., squat, dead lift, heel raise). Initially, the resistive exercise device will be located in the first node of the ISS which means that environmental control of this node may be limited. After assembly is completed and sufficient power is available, active resistive exercise devices providing concentric and eccentric exercise modalities will be available; they may then be located in a modular region of the station.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-4-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Extravehicular Activity
Because of the limited heat removal capacity of the EVA suit, the upper limit of energy utilization (body heat production) during EVA in the Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab flights was 225-300 kcal-hr _, which corresponds to an oxygen uptake of 0.9-1.0 liters.min -_ (very light exercise). The average EVA time was about 6 hr and 4 hr for the Apollo and Skylab astronauts, respectively (Waligora and Horrigan, 1977). Vorobyev et al. (1986) reported similar mean energy expenditures (198-294 kcal.hr _) for two cosmonauts during 170-175 min of EVA; their average oxygen uptake was about 0.7 liters.min _.
The Shuttle EVA suit consists of a pressurized space suit and an integrated lifesupport system. The suit provides 4.3 psi pressure and a minimum oxygen concentration of 95%; it must protect crew members from the space vacuum and from ambient temperatures ranging from -118 °C to 136 °C (-180.4 °F - 276.8 °F). A liquid cooling garment within the EVA suit removes body heat by conduction; but cool air-----4.4 °C (39.9 °F)--at the suit input port is recirculated throughout at a rate of about 2.83 liters.see i to allow some evaporative heat loss. The combined cooling capacity of the suit is sufficient to evaporate sweat at work rates up to400 kcal.hr -_and will allow sustained work rates to 500 kcal-hr t without excessive thermal stress (Greenleaf, 1989a; Powell et al., 1994). This maximal rate of heat removal, equivalent to an oxygen uptake of about 1.7 liters.min _, is about 50% of the average maximal oxygen uptake of the astronaut corps, which is 3.4 liters-min" or 45 ml.min _.kg -I of body weight (Greenleaf, 1990). Constant exercise at a metabolic rate equivalent to 50% of peak VO2 can be continued for 6-8 hr and will result in an equilibrium level of Too of 38.0 _+_0.1 °C (100.4 °F + 0.2 °F) (Astrand, 1960), an optimal level for efficient work performance.
About 480 EVA's will be required during the construction and maintenance of the ISS, and the energy requirements will be similar to those of Shuttle EVA activities. Both the American and Russia EVA suits will be employed. The Russian suit is inflated to a greater pressure (about 6 psi) and there is less thermal insulation, particularly for the hands. Cold injury to the hands has been a concern during American EVA's but less so during Russian EVA's, because they rely less on hand holds and use more free-tether techniques; for example, the Russians "stand down" during night cycles and tuck their gloved hands under the upper arms of the sifit, whereas Americans tend to work throughout the dark cycles.

Postflight Egress and Reconditioning Program
A critical time for heat stress in crew members is during Shuttle entry and landing, particularly in the event of an emergency egress. Since the Challenger accident, all crew members wear a launch and entry suit (LES) during launch, entry, and landing. This suit provides a counter-pressure system for limited protection against hypobaria, as well as thermal protection in case of immersion in cold water. However, the thermal properties of the suit, which were incorporated to protect against hypothermia, also create

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-5-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

a potential risk for hyperthermia. This suit was provided with a cooling fan to shunt cabin air through the suit at a rate of 0.17 m3.min_; this was apparently inadequate, however, because crew members frequently reported heat stress during flight. The ensuing enhanced vasodilation and high sweat rates and dehydration probably contributed to the enhanced postflight orthostatic hypotension observed in some crew members (Bue et aL, 1995). Indeed, with use of a heat strain model developed to predict heat casualties, Pandolf et al. (1995) entered the insulation values of the LES (1.29 clothing units when ventilated) and a predicted landing and emergency egress scenario postflight to calculate tolerance time for a crew member dehydrated by 3% body weight and after loss of heat acclimation. The scenario consisted of a 5.5 hr exposure to 24 °C (75.2 °F, 50% rh) at a low metabolic rate (100 kcal.hr _) to simulate normal pre-landing crew activities, followed by a 1.5 hr exposure to 35 °C (95 °F, 70% rh) at this same metabolic rate. Once the cooling supply to the suit was discontinued (simulating an emergency landing in which crew members would rush from the Shuttle), the tolerance time until Too rose to the unacceptable level of 39 °C (102.2 °F) was only 6 min.
Starting with Shuttle flight STS-62 in 1994, crew members have worn a liquid cooling garment under the LES. This cooling garment weighs about 5 kg (11 lb); it consists of a thermoelectric system that chills water passing through tubes covering the surface of the body. The temperature of the system must be modulated manually by the crew member to maintain thermal comfort during entry and landing. In ground-based tests simulating entry, five subjects performed mild arm exercise (176 W) to simulate worst-case crew activities for 1.5 hr in a 32 °C (89.6 °F) environment. The liquid coolingLES ensemble kept Too from rising more than 0.5 °C (0.9 °F ), and subjective ratings of thermal comfort began at "slightly warm" but were reduced to "neutral" and "comfortable" by the end of the session (Bue et al., 1995).
The LES-liquid cooling garment system is now worn by all crew members during Shuttle landings. Following a 16-day spaceflight, intestinal temperatures of four of the crew were monitored during landing while they wore the LES system and compared with those obtained at the same time of day, 48 hr earlier (Rimmer et al., 1999). Intestinal temperature was elevated significantly by about 0.3 °C- 0.5 °C (0.5 °F - 0.9 °F) during the pre-deorbit preparation and landing, suggesting that the cooling capacity of the LES system is inadequate to handle body heat loads during nominal landing. This leads to further concern about the outcome of a true emergency situation in which crew metabolic rate and heat production could be much higher. Recently, Bishop et al. (1999) measured metabolic rate during the ambulation phase of a simulated egress; metabolic rates varied between 600 kcal.hr _ without G-suit inflation to almost 800 kcal.hr _ with the G-suit inflated maximally to 1.5 psi.

Lunar/Mars Exploration
Lunar/Mars expeditions would expose crew members to extended periods of reduced gravity: microgravity in the spaceship and partial Earth gravity while living and

Schneider, Suzanne M and Greenleaf John E,

-6-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

working on the surface. These environmental conditions will require more sophisticated life-support systems than are presently available.

Moon

The dominant features of a lunar stay are the near vacuum environment and great extremes of ambient temperature. The primary constituents of the lunar atmosphere are neon-20, helium, hydrogen, and argon-40. The length of the lunar day is approximately 15 Earth days, which enables the temperature at the lunar surface at the midequatorial region to reach 121 °C (249.8 °F) during the day and -122 °C (-187.6 °F) at night. Much lower temperatures to -198 °C (-324.4 °F) occur in the more shaded polar regions (Horton, 1997). Twelve Apollo crew members spent a total of 160 hr on the lunar surface at onesixth of Earth's gravity. Metabolic rates during the astronauts' average 6-hr extravehicular activities were 225-300 kcal.hr _, and their activity may have been restricted owing to the limited cooling capacity of their EVA suits (Greenleaf, 1989a).

Mars

Mars has a much more complicated environment than that of the Moon; for

example, it has an atmosphere, although extremely thin, that results in meteorological

phenomena similar to those on Earth. The eccentricity of Mars' orbit results in large variations in its distance from the Sun, and those variations produce distinct seasons. The

Martian day is only about 37 min longer than Earth's. Mars atmosphere is different from

that of Earth in that it consists mostly of CO2 (95.3%) with small amounts of N2 (2.7%),

Ar (1.6%), O2 (0.13%), CO (0.07%), and water vapor (0.03%). The atmospheric pressure on Mars varies (with the seasons) between 7.0 and 10.0 millibars, a result of sublimation

of CO2 in the polar ice caps. The atmosphere on Mars makes the transfer of heat possible

through convection which can be accelerated by the winds which reach speeds in excess

of 20 m.sec _ (45 mph) during dust storms. The average temperature on the planet surface varies from -98 °C (-144.4 °F) to -2 °C (28.4 °F), with diurnal variations of as great as

62 °C (111.6°F) or as little as 13 °C (23.4°F) depending on the season and location. In

southern regions, summer surface temperatures can reach an Earth-like 20 °C (68 °F). One Martian scenario has crew members traveling for approximately 1 year in

weightlessness to reach the planet, then spending up to 3 years on the surface at about

0.38 Earth's gravity before embarking on the 1-year return trip, also in weightlessness.

Intense exercise, pharmacological

countermeasures,

or both would be necessary to

prevent life-threatening changes in muscle and bone mass during extended stays in such

reduced gravity environments.

SPACEFLIGHT

THERMOREGULATION

Maintenance of a constant Too is dependent on maintaining an appropriate balance between factors that increase body temperature (metabolism) and those that reduce it (heat-loss responses). In humans resting in a temperate environment the primary avenue

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-7-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

of heat loss is through nonevaporative mechanisms: radiation, conduction, and

convection. The most important is convective loss from the skin to the environment,

which accounts for roughly 75% of the total body heat loss (Robinson, 1949). During

exercise in a hot environment, evaporation becomes the primary avenue for heat loss in

humans. Sweat that does not evaporate, but drips from the skin, does not produce body

cooling. There are no direct data regarding the effects of weightlessness balance in humans.

on total heat

Heat Production
Energy expenditure during spaceflight is probably similar to that on Earth (Lane et al., 1997). The caloric deficit reported in some crew members, especially early in a mission, likely resulted from a decrease in food intake rather than from an increased energy output.
Heat production during exercise could be altered if there were a change in mechanical efficiency. Mechanical efficiency was estimated during Skylab missions from measurements of oxygen consumption during exercise at 150 W. Six of the nine Skylab crew had a small but statistically significant reduction in mechanical efficiency during cycle-ergometer exercise in flight (Michel et aL, 1977). This reduction may have been related to the increased fitness of these particular Skylab crew members rather than to a true change in metabolic efficiency caused by weightlessness.
Heat Loss
The two primary avenues of body heat loss that may be affected by spaceflight are convection and evaporation. Convective heat loss depends on the nature and rate of flow of air across the surface .of the skin, the surface area for heat exchange, and the temperature gradient between the skin and the surrounding air (Hardy, 1949). At very low air flows (less than 0.12 m-sec"), body heat loss occurs primarily by natural convection, in which heat exchange occurs when the air nearest the skin surface becomes warmer and lighter than the surrounding air. In a 1-G environment, this warm air rises from the skin, thereby removing body heat, In flight, the warm air would not rise and this lack of free convection could lead to increasing heat buildup. Novak et al. (1980) confirmed that at air flows of less than 2 m.sec _, there was an impairment in convective heat loss from an artificially heated metal cylinder in flight. At air flows greater than 2 m.sec _, turbulent flow and forced convective heat loss drastically increased heat loss so that the losses were similar to those that occur in a 1-G environment. These findings may be further complicated in humans where clothing may impede the effect of air flow in enhancing convection.
Skin temperature is a critical determinant of convective heat loss in humans because heat is transferred to the surface of the skin by the circulating blood. Tizil (1974) reported lower resting skin temperatures and hypo-reactive vasomotor responses to

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-8-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

thermal stress during 12 days of bed rest (BR), and others have suggested that there is reduced skin blood flow during exercise (Lee et al., 1999; Greenleaf and Reese, 1980) or heat exposure (Crandall et al., 1994) after BR. Thus, the lack of natural convection and a delay in transfer of heat to the skin surface could significantly impair convective heat loss in weightlessness.

The effect of spaceflight on evaporative heat loss is unclear. The lack of the

effect of gravity would result in formation of a sheet of sweat on the skin surface; since

evaporative heat loss is dependent on the wetted surface area, this sheet should increase

evaporative heat loss. However, this layer of sweat on the skin must evaporate to release

body heat. Formation of such a thick layer of water on the skin may create a situation in

which the skin temperature is insufficient to raise the skin's surface water to the critical

temperature necessary for evaporation (Hardy, 1949). Also, excessive skin wetting could

inhibit sweating by blocking the orifices of the sweat glands. Thus, both impaired transfer

of heat to the skin because of altered vasomotor regulation, and an increased volume of

surface water resulting from less drippage, may impede evaporative heat loss. This

would greatly affect exercise thermal tolerance when evaporation for heat loss.

is the primary avenue

Circadian Shifts

The circadian effect of body Too is markedly altered during spaceflight (Lhagwa,

1984). Crew members on spacecraft orbiting Earth experience complete day/night cycles

approximately every 90 min. This change in light cycling has been postulated to produce

changes in the secretion of brain neurotransmitters,

such as melatonin and growth

hormone, which may be responsible for disruption of sleep patterns and of the normal 24-

hr oscillations in T_o. Sleep patterns may also be disturbed by other effects during flight

such as prolonged working days, noise, and phase shifting of sleep periods which may in

turn reduce the circadian changes in T_o. The outcome of circadian desynchronization

may be fatigue and a "sluggish" response to thermal stressors (Krupina and Tizul, 1977).

During intraplanetary missions, this light/dark cycle may completely disappear until

landing on the surface when a new circadian cycle may be induced.

Deconditioning/Deacclimation

Most American astronauts are moderately fit; their average level of aerobic

capacity (VO2,_x) is about 45 ml.kg_.min :_. They live and work around Houston, Texas,

a warm, humid area in which they have probably acquired some degree of heat acclimatization to the ambient environment. Both Shuttle and ISS ambient conditions are

temperate (see above) so, unless the crew maintains a rigorous in-flight exercise regimen,

they will most likely experience some loss of this acclimatization and a decrease in

aerobic conditioning.

Both deconditioning (Greenleaf and Reese, 1980) and

deacclimation (Roberts et al., 1977) compromise thermoregulatory

function. With a loss

of aerobic capacity there is a decoupling in both the sweating and skin blood flow

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-9-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

responses to a rise in core temperature, resulting in a faster rise in body temperature during exercise. With loss of heat acclimation there is a delay in the onset of sweating and vasodilation, again resulting in a greater body heat storage before heat loss responses are activated (Roberts et aL, 1977). These two effects are additive, resulting in a greater potential for heat exhaustion and fatigue when they occur simultaneously.

The goal on ISS missions will be to maintain ground-level aerobic capacity and

each crew member will spend approximately 90 min.day -1performing exercises which should be sufficient to maintain aerobic fitness. Maintenance of aerobic capacity should

help preserve thermoregulatory

responses during exercise in a cool environment, but it

may not be protective in a warmer environment or under conditions of uncompensable

heat loss such as when wearing the LES or the EVA suit with insufficient cooling.

Addition of an orthostatic stress immediately postflight may compromise exercise and thermal responses, even for crew members who have maintained aerobic fitness. Even though the aerobic capacity of three crew members was maintained during the Skylab 3 and 4 missions (Sawin, Rumel, and Michel, 1975), being subjected to 1-G on landing they experienced significant reduction in aerobic capacity (Michel et al., 1977).

Hypovolemia
One well-known effect of spaceflight is a decrease in blood volume (hypovolemia). Both plasma volume (PV) and red cell mass are reduced during the first 30-60 days of a mission before reaching equilibrium ( Fortney, Schneider, and Greenleaf, 1996). Some data suggest increases in either the interstitial (Greenleaf, 1989b) or cellular fluid compartments (Leach et al., 1996) to compensate for the reduction in blood volume; total body water (TBW) has been reported to be unchanged during relatively short-duration (14-16-day) Shuttle missions, despite significant reduction in the extracellular fluid volume (ECV) (Leach et al., 1996).
A loss of blood volume on Earth of the magnitude occurring during spaceflight results in impaired sweating and skin blood flow (Nadel, Fortney, and Wenger, 1980; Fortney at al., 1981). In space, however, the effects of hypohydration on thermoregulatory responses may differ in that a reduction of blood volume is probably an appropriate adaptation to that environment without vascular hydrostatic gradients. The central blood volume of a resting astronaut is increased transiently during the first 4-6 days of flight and then returns toward the preflight level (Charles and Lathers, 1991). However, when the peripheral blood vessels dilate, thereby shunting blood away from the core to the skin surface during exercise, the smaller central blood volume may cause unloading of cardiopulmonary baroreflexes which would attenuate the degree of peripheral vasodilation leading to faster heat storage. Similarly, during profuse sweating with a smaller blood volume in flight, plasma osmolality could increase at a faster rate, thus initiating fluid-conserving responses which may reduce body sweating and also result in greater heat storage.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

- i 0-

BED-REST THERMOREGULATION

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Data from short-term (< 24 hr ) head-down tilt (I-IDT) or more prolonged BR

studies indicate no significant change in basal or resting body Too (Fortney 1987;

Greenleaf, 1989a). But there is a significant "excessive" increase in Too during controlled

isotonic or isometric exercise regimens atter BR-deconditioning,

which indicates altered

thermoregulatory mechanisms. These altered mechanisms occur in both women (Fortney,

1987) and men (Greenleafand Reese, 1980). From these exercise studies and from

passive heating studies (Crandall et al., 1994), the major conclusion is that reduced

vascular conductance (mainly peripheral blood flow) was responsible for attenuating

body heat dissipation and thus causing an increase in Tco; that is, the cause was mainly a

peripheral rather than a central-acting mechanism. Apparently, decreased sweating does

not play a major role even in the presence of reduced PV, which can reduce sweating in

ambulatory subjects (Greenleaf and Castle, 1971). Chronically decreased TBW and ECV

(including PV) during prolonged BR is a major function of the adaptive syndrome such

that the subjects can no longer be considered hypohydrated and hypovolemic; that is, they

are euhydrated with chronically reduced TBW and ECV. Therefore, the hypovolemia

during BR may no longer be a feasible physiological stimulus for the excessive

hyperthermia as long as the subjects remain in the horizontal or head-down (anti-

hydrostatic) positions.

Even though Mack et al. (1994) concluded that active cutaneous vasodilation in ambulatory subjects was dependent on interaction between supine exercise intensity and

PV, Greenhaff and Clough (1989) reported that VOz,_x, and not heart rate, mean skin

temperature (Tsk), or rectal temperature (T",), was the most important predictor of exercise

sweating rate. The effect ofhypovolemia

in reducing sweating and peripheral blood

flow has not been studied satisfactorily in deconditioned subjects (see spaceflight results

below).

Thermoregulation during supine submaximal exercise (51% "_/O2_x) in hydrated

men with no additional hydration can be altered atter only 6 hr of chair rest (CR) or BR,

or water immersion (WI) at body angles of 20 ° and 80 ° (Greenleaf et al., 1996). The

post-conditioning

hierarchy of the AT,, at 70 rain of exercise was approximately related to

the severity of the treatments (Fig. 1, upper panel): the WI responses were greatest (AT,,: at 20 ° = 1.03 °C + 0.09 °C (1.86 °F + 0.16 °F); at 80 ° = 0.96 °C + 0.13 °C (1.73 °F + 0.23

°F); then BR (AT", = 0.92 °C + 0.13 °C) (1.66 °F + 0.23 °F); CR (AT", = 0.83 °C + 0.08 °C)

(1.43 °F + 0.14 °F); and finally, ambulatory control (AT", = 0.77 °C + 0.13 °C) (1.39 °F +

0.23 °F). Those AT", curves were not different from each other during the first 30 min of

exercise, further emphasizing the importance of the heat dissipation mechanisms, which

do not appear to be fully activated. Factors that had essentially no effect on the T,: were limb (arm, calf) sweating and arm skin or total blood flow. Factors moderately correlated

with T,_ were total body sweating (r = 0.60), skin conductance (r = 0.57), and mean skin

temperature (r = 0.49, Fig. 1, lower panel).

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-1 I-

Thermoregulation during Deconditioning

From these findings and from those in the literature (Fortney, Schneider, and

Greenleaf, 1996; Greenleaf et al., 1982; Kollias et al., 1976; Luu et al., 1990) it would

seem that multiple factors (mechanisms) are involved in deconditioning-induced

exercise

excessive hyperthermia. These include interaction between attenuation of heat transfer

from mainly working muscles to the skin, as well as reduced evaporative heat loss.

Perhaps more emphasis should be placed on the variability of cerebral blood flow, as well

as on the function of central thermo- and osmo-receptors (Kozlowski et al., 1980). These factors may play a greater role in response to the 700-ml cephalic fluid shift (Arborelius

et al., 1972) that takes place in these deconditioning procedures, especially in WI studies

during which the greater exercise AT,, occurred.

THERMOREGULATION

DURING THERMONEUTRAL

IMMERSION

Rectal temperature remains within a range of 0.2 °C (36.7 °C - 36.9 °C)

(98.1 °F - 98.4 °F) during 8 hr of WI to the neck at the thermoneutral

water

temperature of 34.4 °C (93.9 °F) (Greenleafet al., 1980, Fig. 2). Boutelier, Timbal, and

Colin (1973) also reported that T_ remained constant within 0.1 °C (36.7 °C -36.8 °C)

(98.1 °F - 98.2 °F) during 2 hr of WI at 33 °C - 34 °(2 (91.4 °F - 93.2 °F); they also

observed a slight drop in T,_ within the first 2 hr at a water temperature just below 35 °C

(95 °F). Craig and Dvorak (1966) recommended

that the optimal thermoneutral

water

temperature range was 35.0 °C - 35.5 °C (95.0 °F - 95.9 °F).

Mean skin temperature in non-obese subjects remains within + 1 °C (+_1.8 °F) of the water temperature, although local T_k may exhibit greater variability. Moderate variations in body-fat content do not affect body thermal conductivity, because the peripheral arterial circulation short circuits subcutaneous fat on its way to feed the dermal arteriolar plexuses (Boutleier, Timbal, and Colin, 1973). Body thermal conductivity in thermoneutral water is essentially the same as in 22.5 °C (72.5 °F) air where similar T,_ levels (Fig. 2) are a result of the similar body thermal conductivities, as well as the thermal conductivity of water, which is greater than that of air.

As mentioned above, the change and final level of T,_ during supine leg cycle
ergometer exercise (51% _'O2m_) after W1 of 1.03 °C + 0.09 °C and 37.96 °C + 0.12 °C (20 ° angle); and 0.96 °C + 0.13 °C and 37.90 °C + 0.18 °C (800 angle), respectively, were similar to those from a prior study (Greenleaf et al., 1985). This latter study was conducted supine with leg exercise at 50% _rO2,_x where the respective change and final T, were 1.1 °C and 38.1 °C (air control), and 0.9 °C and 38.3 °C after WI (Fig. 3). Neither study showed any significant differences in calculated skin heat conductance data between the control and experimental treatments; reduced sweating (evaporative heat loss) could not account for the higher exercise T, in air after water immersion.

The mechanism for the exercise excessive hyperthermia in air after BR (Formey, 1987; Greenleaf and Reese, 1980) and spaceflight (Fortney et al., 1998) appears to be reduced heat conductance from the body core (active muscles) to the periphery because of

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-12-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

decreased peripheral blood flow. Most data indicate little or no effect ofthermoneutral

WI or moderate submaximal exercise on airway closure (Derion et al., 1992) or on

cardiorespiratory

response in air at a dry-bulb temperature (T_,) of 22 °C (71.6 °F) such as

respiratory gas exchange, end-tidal gas tensions, alveolar ventilation, respiratory

frequency, cardiac output, or pulse rate (Denison et al., 1972). However, total body or

head-out WI generally causes reduced forearm and calf blood flow with accompanying

increase in vascular resistance (vasoconstriction)

followed by hyperemia in air after

emerging from the water (Campbell et al., 1969). On the other hand, Echt, Lange, and

Gauer (1974) observed reduced venous tone (vasodilation) in the forearm during

prolonged (3-hr) head-out WI. This vasodilation, if uncompensated, would facilitate

increased heat loss during exercise in air, but that does not appear to be the case. Perhaps

there is a compensatory post-immersion, exercise-induced peripheral vasoconstriction

that contributes to the excessive hyperthermia.

Thus, there is no clear primary

mechanism for the generally higher exercise core temperature after short-term immersion

deconditioning.

SPACEFLIGHT

EXERCISE THERMOREGULATION

There are no direct measurements of heat balance during exercise in spaceflight. However, submaximal exercise and thermoregulatory responses of two crew members during a 115-day Shuttle-Mir mission were studied preflight and at 5 days postflight (Fortney et al., 1998). Both crew members were able to complete a supine exercise protocol (20 min at 40% VO2,_ and 20 min at 65% VO2,_) preflight with minimal stress and with heart rates of only 123 and 137 bpm. Postflight, however, the exercise was discontinued after 8-9 min into the 65% "_O2_,, work level when both crew members began having difficulty maintaining the pedaling frequency and complained of leg fatigue. The exercise was terminated when the heart rate exceeded the highest value from the preflight test. The body Too of each crew member after exercise had been stopped approached the final preflight temperature. Since resting core temperatures were similar and the total exercise time was approximately 35% shorter postflight, the rate of rise of Too was greater postflight. From these and previous BR data (Lee et al., 1999), it appears that heat production was not altered, and thus the primary reason for the greater rate of rise in T˘o was impaired heat loss from altered vasodilatory (Fig. 4) and sweating (Fig. 5) responses.
For any given T_o during exercise after flight, the skin blood flow and sweating responses are greatly reduced, resulting in faster and greater body heat storage; thus, if exercise were to be continued, there would be a greater probability of heat injury.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-I 3-

CLINICAL

APPLICATIONS

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Many of the findings discussed above may have direct application for people on

Earth. For example, in an attempt to reduce heat strain in astronauts wearing protective

clothing, special cooling garments and temperature-monitoring

equipment have been and

continue to be developed. The cooling garment worn underneath the EVA suit is

currently being evaluated for use in firefighter's ensembles by incorporating many of the cooling properties of the suit to increase the thermal tolerance of firefighters from the

present 10-20 min to at least 1 hr. The isolated environment provided by the EVA suit

has also been used for the management of immunodeficient

patients, such as the well

publicized "Bubble Boy"(Guerra and Shearer, 1986). A suit with UV protection has

been used by children with xeroderma pigmentosum, a rare disease in which sunlight can be life threatening. The cooling system from the EVA suit has also been used in

developing garments for patients with multiple sclerosis, spina bifida, cerebral palsy, and other disorders.

Non-rectal temperature sensors used for monitoring core temperature in crew
members have been evaluated. The rectal probe produces much more discomfort in flight

than before flight. This discomfort induced development of ingestible telemetry pill

systems (Human Technologies Inc., St. Petersburg, FL; Personal Electronic, Inc., Wellesley, MA). These pills and monitors could provide continuous accurate readings of

Too during cardiac transplant surgeries or hyperthermic treatment of cancer patients, for circadian monitoring of patients with endocrine disorders, during rehabilitation of

prolonged BR patients, or when reconditioning a hot climate.

athletes who suddenly resume training in

Thermoregulatory

studies conducted in weightlessness offer a unique opportunity

to study basic physiological processes. For example, the unusual combination of a

reduced extracellular fluid volume without significant change in total body water may

provide new insight into the role of extravascular volume receptors in the control of cardiovascular and thermal reflex responses. The changes in autonomic reflexes which result from the altered blood flow distribution may mimic changes that occur with aging

or in certain disease states (idiopathic hypotension). Finally, an understanding of the

susceptibility to heat injuries that can occur under conditions of only moderately elevated body core temperatures, and the use of cooling garments to prevent such injuries, may

have occupational or military applications for workers who perform in environments

where impermeable clothing is worn for extended periods.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-14-

·r

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

REFERENCES

Arborelius, Jr., M., Balldin, U. I., Lilja, B., Lundgren, C. E. G. Hemodynamic changes in man during immersion with the head above water. Aerospace Med. 43: 592-598, 1972.

Astrand, I. Aerobic work capacity in men and women with special reference to age. Acta Physiol. Scand. 49: Suppl 169: 1-92, 1960.
Bishop, P. A., Lee, S. M. C., Conza, N. E., Clapp, L. L., Moore, A. D., Williams, W. J., Guilliams, M. E., Greenisen, M.C. Carbon dioxide accumulation, walking performance, and metabolic cost in the NASA Launch and Entry Suit. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 70: 656-665, 1999.

Boutelier, C., Timbal, J., Colin, J. Conductance thermique du corps humain en immersion a la neutralite thermique et en amibance froide. Arch. Sci. Physiol. 27: 189-205, 1973 (NASA technical translation F-16258).

Bue, G. C., Conger, B. C., Hooper, P. E., Chang, C., Sauser, B. Shuttle launch entry suit liquid cooling system thermal performance. 25 th Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE Technical Paper Series 951546, 1995.
Campbell, L. B., Gooden, B. A., Lehman, R. G., Pym, J. Simultaneous calf and forearm blood flow during immersion in man. Aust..1. Exp. Med. Sci. 47: 747-754, 1969.

Charles, J. B., Lathers, C. M. Cardiovascular Pharmacol. 31: 1010-1023, 1991.

adaptations to spaceflight.

3:. Clin.

Convertino, V. A., Greenleaf, J. E., Bemauer, E. M. Role of thermal and exercise

in the mechanism ofhypervolemia.

J. Appl. Physiol. 48: 657-664, 1980.

factors

Craig, A. B., Jr., Dvorak, M. Thermal regulation during water immersion. Physiol. 21: 1577-1585, 1966.

3:. Appl.

Crandall, C. G., Johnson, J. M., Convertino, V. A., Raven, R. B., Engelke, K.A. Altered

thermoregulatory

responses after 15 days of head-down tilt. 3:. Appl. Physiol. 77:

1863-1867, 1994.

Czeisler, C. A., Chiasera, A. J., Duffy, J. F. Research on sleep, circadian rhythms and aging: applications to manned spaceflight. Exp. Gerontol. 26: 217-232, 1991.

Denison, D. M., Wagner, D., Kingaby, G. L., West, J. B. Cardiorespiratory

responses to

exercise in air and under water, or. Appl. Physiol. 33: 426-430, 1972.

Derion, T., Guy, H. J. B., Tsukimoto, K., Schaffartzik, W., Prediletto,

Knight, D. R., Wagner, P.D. Ventilation-perfusion

relationships

head-out water immersion. 3:. Appl. Physiol. 72: 64-72, 1992.

R., Poole, D. C., in the lung during

Echt, M., Lange, L., Gauer, O. H. Changes in peripheral venous tone and central

transmural venous pressure during immersion in a thermo-neutral bath. Pfliigers

Arch. 352:211-217,

1974.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-15-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Fortney, S. M. Thermoregulatory Adaptations to Inactivity. In Adaptive Physiology Stressful Environments, edited by S. Samueloff and M.K. Yousef, CRC Press, Raton, FL, 1987, pp. 75-83.

to Boca

Fortney, S. M., Mikhaylov, V., Lee, S. M. C., Kobzev,Y., Gonzalez, R., and Greenleaf, J.

E. Body temperature and thermoregulation

during submaximal exercise after 115-

day spaceflight. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69: 137-141, 1998.

Fortney, S. M., Nadel, E. R., Wenger, C. B., and Bove, J. R. Effect of blood volume on sweating rate and body fluids in exercising humans. J Appl. Physiol. 51: 15941600, 1981.

Fortney, S. M., Schneider, V. S., and Greenleaf, J. E. The physiology of bed rest. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4, Environmental Physiology, edited by M.J. Fregley and C. M. Blatteis. Oxford University Press: New York, Vol. 2, Chap. 39, 1996, pp. 889-939.

Greenhaff, P. L., and Clough, P. J. Predictors of sweat loss in man during prolonged exercise. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 58: 348-352, 1989.

Greenleaf, J. E. Energy and thermal regulation during bed rest and spaceflight. Physiol. 67: 507-516, 1989a.

J. Appl.

Greenleaf, J. E. Hormonal regulation of fluid and electrolytes during prolonged bed rest: implications for microgravity. In Hormonal Regulation of Fluid and Electrolytes, edited by J. R. Claybaugh and C. E. Wade, Plenum Publ. Corp., New York, 1989b, pp. 216-232.

Greenleaf, J. E. Human exercise capabilities in space. 20 th Intersociety Conference on Environmental Systems, SAE Technical Paper 901200, 1990, 11 pp.

Greenleaf, J. E., and Castle, B. L. Exercise temperature regulation in man during

hypohydration and hyperhydration.

J. Appl. Physiol. 30: 847-853, 1971.

Greenleaf, J. E., Hutchinson, T., Shaffer-Bailey, M., and Looft-Wilson, R. Exercise

thermoregulation

after 6 hr chair rest, 6 ° head-down bed-rest, and water immersion

deconditioning in men. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 72: 303-309, 1996.

Greenleaf, J. E., and Reese, R. D. Exercise thermoregulation Appl. Physiol. 48: 72-78, 1980.

after 14 days of bed rest. J.

Greenleaf, J. E,, Shvartz, E., Kravik, S., and Keil, L.C. Fluid shifts and endocrine responses during chair rest and water immersion in man. J. Appl. Physiol. 48: 7988, 1980.

Greenleaf, J. E., Silverstein, L., Bliss, J., Langenheim, V., Rossow, H., and Chao, C. Physiological responses to prolonged bed rest and fluid immersion in man: A compendium of research (1974-1980). Moffett Field, CA, NASA TM-81324, 1982, 110 pp.

Greenleaf, J. E., Spaul, W. A., Kravik, S. E., Wong, N., and Elder, C. A. Exercise

thermoregulation

in men after 6 hours of immersion. Aviat. Space Environ. Med.

56: 15-18, 1985.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-16-

Thermoregulation

during Deconditioning

Guerra, I. C., and Shearer, W. T. Environmental control in management of

immunodeficient

patients: experience with "David." Clin. lmmunol. Immunopathol.

40: 128-135, 1986.

Hardy, J. D. Heat Transfer. In Physiology of Heat Regulation, edited by L.H. Newburgh, W.B. Saunders, Co.: Philadelphia, PA, 1949, pp. 78-108.

Horton, R. D. Thermal environment evaluation of EVA on the Moon and Mars. Houston, TX, Lockheed Martin Tech. Memo. LMSMSS 32509, 1997.

Kollias, J., Van Derveer, to water immersion TM X-3308, 1976,

D., Dorchak, K. J., and Greenleaf, J. E. Physiologic in man: A compendium of research. Washington, 87pp.

responses DC, NASA

Kozlowski, S., Greenleaf, J. E., Turlejska, E., and Nazar, K. Extracellular hyperomolality and body temperature during physical exercise in dogs. Am. J. Physiol. Regulatory Integrative Comp. Physiol. 239: R180-R183, 1980.

Krupina, T. N., and Tizul, A. Ya. Clinical aspects of changes in the nervous system in the course of49-day antiorthostatic hypokinesia. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 11: 26-31, 1977.

Lane, H. W., Gretebeck, R. J., Schoeller, D. A., Davis-Street, J., Socki, R. A., and Gibson, E. K. Comparison of ground-based and spaceflight energy expenditure and water turnover in middle-aged healthy male U.S. astronauts. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 65: 4-12, 1997.

Leach, C. S., Alfrey, C. P., Suki, W. N., Leonard, J. I., Rambaut, P. C., Inners, L. D., Smith, S. M., Lane, H. W., and Krauhs, J. M. Regulation of body fluid compartments during short-term spaceflight..1. Appl. Physiol. 81:105-116, 1996.

Leach, C. S., Leonard, J. I., Rambaut, P. C, and Johnson, P.C. Evaporative water loss in man in a gravity-free envionment. Jr. Appl. Physiol. 45: 430-436, 1978.

Lee, S. M. C., Williams, W. J., Greenleaf, J. E., and Schneider, S.M. Exercise thermoregulation after 13-day bed rest. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 31: $309, 1999.

Leithead, C. S., and Lind, A. R. Heat Stress andHeat Disorders. F.A. Davis Co.: Philadelphia, PA, 1964, pp. 195-196.

Lhagwa, L.. Circadian rhythm of human body temperature during spaceflights. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 13: 15-18, 1984.

Kosm.

Luu, P. B., Ortiz, V., Barnes, P. R, and Greenleaf, J. E. Physiological responses to prolonged bed rest in humans: A compendium of research (1981-1988). Moffett Field, CA, NASA TM-102249, 1990, 134 pp.

Mack, G. W., Nose, H., Takamata, A., Okuno, T., and Morimoto, T. Influence of exercise intensity and plasma volume on active cutaneous vasodilation in humans. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 26: 209-216, 1994.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-17-

Thermoregulation during Deconditioning

Michel, E. L., Rummel, J. A., Sawin, C. F., Buderer, M. C., and Lem, J. D. Results of Skylab medical experiment M 171-metabolic activity. In Biomedical Results of Skylab, edited by R. S. Johnson and L. F. Dietlein, Washington, DC, NASA SP-377, 1977, pp. 372-387.

Nadel, E. R., Fortney, S. M., and Wenger, C. B. Effect of hydration state on circulatory and thermal regulations. J. Appl. Physiol. 49: 715-721, 1980.
Novak, L., Prokopova, L., Genin, A. M., and Golov, V. K. Results of 'heat transfer 1' experiment conducted aboard the Cosmos-936 biosatellite. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 14: 73-76, 1980.

O'Brien, C., Young, A. J., and Sawka, M. N. Hypohydration and thermoregulation

in

cold air. J. Appl. Physiol. 84: 185-189, 1998.

Pandolf, K. B., Stroschein, L. A., Gonzalez, R. R., and Sawka, M. N. heat strain and performance with application to space operations. Environ. Med. 66: 364-368, 1995.

Predicting human Aviat. Space

Powell, M. R., Horrigan, Jr., D. J., Waligora, J. M., and Norfleet, W. T. Extravehicular activities. In Space Biology and Medicine, edited by A. E. Nicogossian, C. L. Huntoon, and S. L. Pool, Lea and Febiger: Philadelphia, PA, 1994, pp. 128-140.

Pugh, L. G. C. E., Corbett, J. L., and Johnson, R. H. Rectal temperatures, weight losses, and sweat rates in marathon running. J. Appl. Physiol. 23: 347-352, 1967.

Putcha, L., Berens, K. L., Marshburn, T. H., Ortega, H. J., and Billica, R. D.

Pharmaceutical use by U.S. astronauts on Space Shuttle missions. Environ. Med. 70: 705-708, 1999.

Aviat.

Space

Rimmer, D. W., Dijk, D-J., Ronda, J. M., Hoyt, R., and Pawelczyk, liquid cooling garments to minimize heat strain during space landing. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 31: $305, 1999.

J. A. shuttle

Efficiency of deorbit and

Roberts, M. F., Wenger, C. B., Stolwijk, J. A. J, and Nadel, E.R. Skin blood flow and sweating changes following exercise training and heat acclimation. J. Appl. Physiol. 43: 133-137, 1977.

Robinson, S. Physiological adjustments to heat. In Physiology of Heat Regulation,

edited by L. H. Newburgh, 231.

W. B. Saunders, Co.: Philadelphia,

PA, 1949, pp. 193-

Robinson, S. Temperature regulation in exercise. Pediatrics 32: (part II): 691-702, 1963.
Sawin, C. F., Rummel, J. A., and Michel, E. L. Instrumented personal exercise during long-duration space flights. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 46: 394-400, 1975.

Sawka, M. N., Young, A. J., Latzka, W. A., Neufer, P. D., Quigley, M. D., and Pandolf, K.B. Human tolerance to heat strain during exercise: influence of hydration. 3". Appl. Physiol. 73: 368-375, 1992.
Shibolet, S., Lancaster, M. C., and Danon, Y. Heat stroke: A review. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 47: 280-301, 1976.

Schneider, Suzanne M, and Greenleaf John E.

-18-

Thermoregulation during Deconditioning

Smith, D. J. Protective clothing and thermal stress. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 23: 217-224, 1980.

Tanaka, M., Brisson, G. R., and Voile, for workers wearing impermeable Assoc. ,l. 39: 885-890, 1978.

M. A. Body temperatures in relation to heart rate clothing in a hot environment. Am. Indust. Hyg.

Tizul, A.Ya. The function of thermoregulation (hypokinesia). Z. Nevropatol. Psikhiat. 1974).

in protracted 73: 1791-1794,

limitation of motor activity 1973 (NASA TT F-15,566,

Vorobyev, Y. I., Gazenko, O. G., Shulzhenko, Y. B., Grigoryev, A. I., Barer, A. S., Yegorov, A. D., and Skiba, I. A. Preliminary results of medical investigation during 5-month spaceflight aboard Slayut 7-Soyuz-T complex. Kosm. Biol. Aviakosm. Med. 20: 27-34, 1986.

Waligora, J. M., and Horrigan, Jr., D. J. Metabolic cost of extravehicular activities. In Biomedical Results from Skylab, edited by R.S. Johnson and L.F. Dietlein, Washington, DC, NASA SP-377, 1977, pp. 395-399.

Waligora, J. M., Powell, M. R., and Sauer, R. L. Spacecratt life support systems. In Space Physiology and Medicine, edited by A. E. Nicogossian, C.L. Huntoon, and S.L. Pool, Lea and Febiger: Philadelphia, PA, 1994, pp. 109-127.

Wieland, P. O. Living together in space: the design and operation of the life support systems on the International Space Station. Washington, DC, NASA TM-206956, vol. 1, 1998.

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-19-

Thermoregulation during Deconditioning
FIGURE LEGENDS:
Figure 1: Changes in rectal temperature and mean skin temperature during exercise after chair rest, bed rest, and immersion. (From Greenleaf et al., 1996 with permission).
Figure 2: Comparison of changes in heart rate, rectal temperature, and oxygen uptake during immersion or chair rest. (From Greenleafet al., 1980 with permission.)
Figure 3: Rectal temperature and mean skin temperature responses to exercise following control and immersion conditions. K_k = calculated skin heat conductance. (From Greenleaf et al., 1985 with permission).
Figure 4: Skin blood flow responses in two crew members after 115 days of spaceflight. (From Fortney et al., 1998 with permission).
Figure 5: Sweat rate responses in two crew members alter 115 days of spaceflight. (From Fortney et al., 1998 with permission).

Schneider, Suzanne M. and Greenleaf John E.

-20-

v

1.2

m

1.1

--K Ambulatory control

1.0

---e Chair rest

_-0 Bed rest

.9

_ Immersion 20°

.8

----A Immersion 80 °

.7

.6

.5 -4
.3 .2 .1 0 -.1

,t,_,t

i

i

1.0 .8 .6 .4 .2

"t

-]_J

._F J i'+

T-/_

I_

4k_

._p'-f -

)'

._ J_:_'_

J

[r

.j_

I

,

i

i

i

-.2 -.4

i -.6

-.8 i _, ,,,I

-0

10

, Exe(rscuispeine),,

20

30

40

Time, min

,

,

>i

50

60

70

Schm_:_r

Fig. I-1

/

7O __ _
65 __
60 __L-_'_

Immersion or chair rest

_

_

Heart rateo....... 0 Immersion

_

* Chair rest

l T

5O

45

!

I.

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

37.0 36.9
?
36.8 36.7
.35
˘,-

Rectal temperature

_,

Oxygen uptake
_ _

Immersion · Chair rest

.25

I

34 33
o
2 I_e_"
0

-'0" --e---2

Ambient temperature

"

_

"_

"0- "-"-0--

4

6

Time, hr

"0-- ---e 8

Schneider/Greenleaf

fig. 1.2

/

38.5
38.0

O Post-immersion · Control

37.5

//

i!

® 37.0 -

"

0

36.5

J

I

I

I

l

I

I

33.0
i
E 32.0 -
t"
31.5 -
31.0

KSK
;!

-˘

Exercise

_ Rec.

l

I

|

.I

i

I

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

Time, min

Schneider-Green|eaf

fig, 1-3

f

5OO 0 Pre

3= 400
o q::

· R+5

_ 300
O
,ID

200

u_
<3 o_ 100

Subject 1 O

-100 i 36.8

t

i

t

i

l

37.0 37.2 37.4 37.6 37.8

Core temperature, °C

I
38.0

500 O Pre · R+5
400
300
200
100
o

Subject 2

-100

,

I

I

I

i

I

36.8 37.0 37.2 37.4 37.6 37.8 38.0

Core temperature, °C

Schneider/Greenleaf

fig. 1.4

J
.° z ._ s
w

2.5

D
0 Pre

· R+5

_E 2.0

-E- 1.5
E 1.0
G

-_ 0.5
o

Subject I
O
oo
cP
O
oo

-0.5

,

,

,

I

I

I

36.8 37.0 37.2 37.4 37.6 37.8 38.0

Core temperature, °C

2.5 -O Pre · R+5
2.0
1.5 1.0 0.5

Subject 2

I

i

,

1

i

J

36.8 37.0 37.2 37.4 37.6 37.8 38.0

Core temperature, °C

Schneider/'Greenleaf

fig. 1.5

